Building for Student Success/Community Bond Oversight Committee Update
February 2026
As the District enters the fourth full calendar year of implementation, the 2022 Building for Student Success
program continues to advance through a structured, multi-phase approach designed to deliver long-term value
and responsible stewardship of taxpayer investments.
PHASE 1
The final project of phase 1—installation of rooftop solar panels on New Vista—will begin later this month and
is expected to take approximately ten weeks. The system is projected to offset 95 percent or more of the
building’s electrical usage. The new school continues to be embraced by students and staff, with feedback
emphasizing how the building supports the school’s values of individuality, collaboration, and wellness.
PHASE 2
Phase 2 | 2024/25
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE ONGOING
● Casey Middle ● Arapahoe Ridge HS / Transitions /
● Escuela Bilingüe Pioneer Boulder TEC
● Horizons K-8 ● Boulder High
● Louisville Elementary ● Monarch High
● Louisville Middle
● Monarch K-8
● Ryan Elementary
● Peak to Peak
● Summit Middle
Universal Access Playgrounds
● Aspen Creek
● Coal Creek
● Eldorado PK-8
● Fireside
● Monarch PK-8
● Ryan
Most phase 2 projects have completed construction with three larger projects—Apex/ARHS/BU, Boulder High,
and Monarch High continuing construction into 2026. Owner Architect Contractor (OAC) meetings for these
two year projects have continued since last summer, bringing together project teams and school staff to gather
user feedback, guide future phases, and proactively resolve any issues.
Apex new spaces
Students in the Biomedical Sciences, Sports Medicine, Emergency Medical Technician, Criminal Justice and
Teacher Academy programs at Apex started the second semester in larger, updated, professional-feeling
new labs and classrooms. The recently completed work also renovated the administrative suite, updated the
lobby, and created a college and career counseling area.
Phase 4 of 5 is underway and includes an addition and renovations that will support Aviation & Aerospace,
Video Production, and Computer Science Programs along with flexible classrooms, an outdoor courtyard and
faculty support spaces. Phase 4 will wrap up in May with the final phase scheduled to be complete for the
Fall 2026 semester. Phase 5 will include modernized spaces for Construction Technology, Modern
Manufacturing, and Optical Engineering with lighter updates to Collision and Automotive including a new
paint booth.
PHASE 3
Phase 3 | 2025/26
● Aspen Creek PK-8 ● Manhattan Middle
● BCSIS/High Peaks ● Mapleton ECC
● Birch Elementary ● Platt Middle
● Centennial Middle ● Southern Hills Middle
● Community Montessori ● Whittier Elementary
● Crest View Elementary
✱
Fairview High
* indicates a two-year project
Phase 3 projects have completed design and bidding and are now preparing for construction to begin later this
year. All construction Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP) contract amendments were presented to and
approved by the Board in November 2025. In addition to the projects listed above, we will also wrap up our final
five Universal Access playground projects this summer.
We began the calendar year by scheduling coordination meetings with contractors and architects to review and
finalize summer construction schedules and to develop interior and exterior site safety and logistics plans.
These efforts have been followed by ongoing meetings with BVSD departments, including Security, IT, and
Facilities, to identify impacts to building systems and to coordinate interdepartmental projects. Meetings with
principals and staff have begun and will continue to keep them informed and to prepare them for the upcoming
work. As contractor mobilization approaches, more detailed reviews of packing procedures and room
preparation requirements will take place.
PHASE 4
Phase 4 | 2026 / 27
● Bear Creek Elementary ● Heatherwood Elementary
● Coal Creek Elementary ● Kohl Elementary
● Community Montessori ● Mesa Elementary
● Eisenhower ● Nederland Elementary
● Eldorado PK-8 ● Nederland MS/HS
● Flatirons Elementary ● Superior Elementary
✱
Foothill Elementary
Architect and contractor teams for Phase 4 projects were secured in October, and design contracts went to the
Board in November 2025. As you know, parallel with the design process, the district will be engaging with staff,
families, and the community related to declining enrollment in the district and possible facility-related actions
the Board could take to address the issue.
Despite this uncertainty about the future of some schools, we are proceeding with design for several reasons.
Understanding the existing needs of our buildings and the costs to address them will be valuable as BVSD
develops school adjustment options for the Board to consider. In addition, moving ahead with design will put
us in a position to start construction in 2027, pending the Board’s decisions in October.
Community Bond Oversight Committee Update
A written update was given to the Community Bond Oversight Committee (CBOC) in November and the group
met in person on Feb. 4. The February meeting was held at Apex so the group could see the completed work of
phases 1-3. At the meeting, staff shared project updates, a presentation on declining enrollment, and financial
reports.
As of January, $191M has been expended to date. A total of $52M is encumbered, and $151M is forecasted
yet to be spent in the program. The February financial reports are linked below for your review.
Financial Summary
Allocations Summary
Total Program Forecast
Staff presented a recommendation to allocate $5,556,490 in Bond Interest Earnings to fund a new project to
refresh the district’s wired and wireless network. BVSD’s existing network has reached the end of its service life
after being installed in 2016. Details of the action item are available HERE.
CBOC voted unanimously to recommend the transfer of funds which will be presented as a consent agenda
item at the Feb. 17 Board of Education meeting.