--- page 1 ---
Boulder County Public Health
Community Health Assessment Data
June 2023
--- page 2 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
For more information, please contact:
Elise Waln, MPH Rachel Mintle, MPH
Health Planning & Evaluation Manager Health Planner
Strategic Initiatives Branch Strategic Initiatives Branch
Boulder County Public Health Boulder County Public Health
Office: 303-678-6304 | Mobile: 303-489-6588 303-413-7518
ewaln@bouldercounty.org rmintle@bouldercounty.org
OMNI Project Team: Devanae Allen, Christina Chavez, Ona Crow, Bianca Gonzalez de la Rosa, Claire Luce, Emily Murillo,
and Becca Ruiz
Acknowledgments:
OMNI Institute would like to thank:
• The Boulder County community members who attended focus group discussions and/or attended the May 2023
Community Open House. These community members contributed their time, critical insights, and perspectives on
mental and behavioral health needs in Boulder County.
• The Boulder County Public Health (BCPH) core project team and workgroup members who collaborated with OMNI
on the entire CHAPS process including the implementation plan; review of data collection tools, data and
interpretation of findings; and outreach and connection with community members and organizations to ensure the
voices of key focus populations were represented in the process. Workgroup members included:
Indira Gujral, MS, PhD –Division Manager, Daphne McCabe, MBA, MSW –Division
o o
Communicable Disease & Emergency Management Manager, Family Health
Kari Middleton, PhD -Emergency Management Planner David LaRocca -Mental & Behavioral Health
o o
Allison Bayley, MPH, CHES -Community Substance Abuse Coordinator
o
Prevention & Inspire Youth Connections Project Manager Rachel Mintle, MPH –Health Planner
o
Seb Fairbanks -OASOS Program Specialist Elise Waln, MPH –Health Planning & Evaluation
o o
Rachel Arndt, LEED AP, AICP -Built Environment & HEAL Manager
o
Coordinator Jax Gonzalez, PhD -OSASOS Program
o
Carol McInnes -Environmental Health Specialist Coordinator
o
Bill Hayes, PE -Air Quality Program Coordinator Kelli Hintch -Strategic Initiatives Director
o o
Megan Hale, LCSW, IMH-E (IV) -Early Childhood Mental Lexi Nolen, MPH, PhD –Executive Director
o o
Health Consultant
• Boulder County’s Behavioral Health Roadmap efforts, with great appreciation to Marcy Campbell for ongoing
collaboration with BCPH and OMNI to share information and align efforts.
• Community partners who shared primary data from their own information gathering efforts with focus
populations that helped develop the community snapshots central to this report. These partners offered space
in existing and additional meetings to discuss and gather community input. Key partners included:
• Area Agency on Aging • Boulder County Nurse Family Partnership
• Boulder County Housing and Human Services • Genesis
and their partners at the University of New • Women, Infants, & Children Program
Hampshire’s SMART Program • Youth Advocating for Youth (YAY)
• Additional community organizations and service providers who shared their own critical perspectives
and expertise to ensure the needs of focus populations were elevated in the report.
2
--- page 3 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Table of Contents
Introduction………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….4
Methods…………………………………………………………………….…………………………………………………………………………………5
The Importance of Social Determinants of Health…………………………………………………………………………………………8
Navigating the Data in This Report………………………………………………………………….…………………………………………….9
Boulder County Snapshot……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…………..12
Natural Disasters & Climate Change…….……………………………………………………………………………………………….…….15
Rural & Mountain Communities ….……………………………………………………………………………….…………………………….16
Maternal Health Snapshot……..……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………18
Youth Snapshot……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………21
Young Adult Snapshot……………………………………………………………………………………………….………………………………..24
Older Adults Snapshot……………………………………………………………………………………….……………………………………….28
Hispanic/Latinx/LatineSnapshot………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...30
LGBTQ+ Snapshot.……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….34
People Experiencing Homelessness Snapshot……………………………………………………………………………………………..38
People with Disabilities Snapshot……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….40
Capacity Assessment…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..41
Conclusion & Next Steps……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..48
References: ……………………………………………………………….……………………………………………………………………………….49
3
--- page 4 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Introduction
Every five years, all public health agencies in Colorado are required to follow the Colorado Health Assessment and
Planning System (CHAPS) process to create a public health improvement plan for submission to the Office of Public
Health Practice, Planning, and Local Partnerships (see visual below). In 2022, Boulder County Public Health (BCPH)
partnered with OMNI Institute to conduct a community needs assessment and corresponding Public Health
Improvement Plan for 2023-2028.
During this same timeframe, Boulder County Commissioners funded a Behavioral Health Planning team (led by
Boulder County Community Services Department) to conduct an assessment of the County’s behavioral health
system and develop a shared vision and long-term strategic plan, or Behavioral Health Roadmap. In combination
with other county assessments, BCPH made the decision to focus their CHAPS process on mental and behavioral
health, partnering closely with the Roadmap team throughout the process to discuss emerging findings and align
priorities. The Roadmap team contributed extensive qualitative data gathered through their community
engagement efforts which is integrated throughout this report.
The Community Health Assessment (CHA) process took place between September 2022 and March 2023 and was
guided by a workgroup comprised of members from Boulder County Public Health working directly with key
populations in the County and involved in mental & behavioral health-related efforts. The process included
extensive input from a variety of community partners, local leaders, and community members. It also included a
capacity assessment that identified key strengths related to addressing behavioral health needs within BCPH and
in Boulder County, as well as opportunities for growth.
This report details the assessment process and the data synthesized from secondary data sources and county-level
community engagement efforts. It also provides a summary of the capacity assessment, summarizing BCPH’s
current resources and ability to address identified needs. The findings from these two assessments are intended to
directly inform a robust planning process leading to the development of the Boulder County Public Health
Improvement Plan (PHIP).
The Colorado Public Health Assessment and Planning System
The Colorado Public Health Assessment and Planning System, or CHAPS, is a standardized, coordinated
approach to public health planning used by local public health agencies across the state of Colorado.
The Community Health The Capacity Assessment
Assessment is a comprehensive assesses the ability of the
assessment of the community's community/Boulder Public Health
health and environmental to address local priority issues,
status including building upon current
relevant efforts and collaborations
The Public Health Improvement Plan
describes priorities for health improvement, involved partners, action plans, and
methods to evaluate progress
4
--- page 5 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Methods
It is important for local public health departments to utilize the core CHAPS model while remaining responsive to the
unique context of their communities. The visual below depicts the specific CHAPS process for Boulder County Public
Health, followed by a summary of steps involved in the core components of this CHA report. Subsequent pages
further detail the methods used for data synthesis and selecting the focus areas for the Boulder County CHA.
The Boulder County Community Health Assessment & Public Health Improvement Planning Process
Secondary Data Prioritization of
Review Focus Populations
Synthesis of Community Engagement Data
from Focus Populations
Data Synthesis, Capacity Initial Strategy Community PHIP
Review & Final Assessment Development Strategy Input Development
Prioritization
Key steps for the Boulder CHA and Capacity Assessment included:
Community Health Assessment (CHA) Capacity
Assessment
Secondary data was compiled and summarized to highlight key areas of Key strengths and gaps in existing mental
strength and opportunities for improvement in mental and behavioral and behavioral health services were
health (MBH) in Boulder County. identified at the county level, for each
Disparities were explored and focus populations were selectedby the focus population, and for Boulder
CHA/PHIP Workgroup. County Public Health.
Community input from focus populations was gathered through extensive Gaps in knowledge were filled in
county-level community engagement efforts and explored: root causes of through CHA/PHIP Workgroup input and
MBH challenges for specific communities; existing strengths and resources an internal BCPH Capacity Survey
that already support the community; and strategies and activities for BCPH
administered in early 2023.
that will improve MBH for focus populations and the county as a whole.
5
--- page 6 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Methods
Secondary Data Review
The initial step inthe assessment processwas forOMNI's research team to summarize available secondary data on
mental and behavioral health for Boulder County. The primary goal was to pinpoint potential inequities experienced
by subpopulations in the County. The secondary data synthesis also focused specifically on mental and behavioral
health behaviors and outcomes that Boulder County Public Health has the ability to directly address or influence. As
noted previously, Boulder County wasalready engaged in a variety of community health assessment efforts such as
the Behavioral Health Roadmap. OMNI and the BCPH CHA/PHIP Workgroup made intentional efforts to avoid
duplication of these efforts and to minimize the burden on community groups that had already offered related
input.
Data were pulled from various secondary sources, including the Healthy Kids Colorado Survey, the Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment's Colorado Health Indicators, and the United States (U.S.) Census.
The team aimed to collect data that were disaggregated by population characteristics, such as race/ethnicity, sexual
orientation, gender identity, and age group, wherever possible, to identify potential disparities. However, there
were limitations to the availability of data for some of these populations, which emphasizes the pervasive need for
more disaggregated data collection efforts, particularly for historically underrepresented groups.
After collecting and disaggregating the data, the team reviewed and analyzed it for changes over time, key trends in
disparities across subpopulations, and comparisons to state and national averages to identify both county strengths
and areas of need. The data were then organized and cataloged into key behavioral health domains and presented
to the CHA/PHIP Workgroup for review and interpretation. The online platform Padlet was used tofacilitate
Workgroup discussion and the selection of initial priorities, as itallows for group interaction, commenting, and
prioritization processes. It should be noted that disparities and inequities across social identities influence mental
and behavioral health outcomes, which was a lens applied throughout the CHAPS process .
Initial Prioritization Process
The CHA/PHIP Workgroup reviewed and discussed the Padlet data and decided upon the initial groups listed
below that would be centered in the subsequent process of compiling community input. These focus populations
were selected based on disparities apparent in the data and additional local context and expertise shared among
Workgroup members. Gathering input from these groups is crucial to identifying the underlying causes of
challenges within their communities, recognizing existing strengths and resources, and proposing potential
strategies and activities for BCPH to enhance mental and behavioral health. The process aimed to elevate insights
shared directly by the individuals experiencing disparities in order to shape effective solutions that are
contextually relevant and culturally responsive. These initial groups included:
o New parents, infants and young children o People with disabilities
o Youth and young adults o Additional context/considerations for the following
Older adults (with considerations for older men groupsas available:
o
as available)  Mountain communities, with additional context re:
LGBTQ+ community members older adults
o
Hispanic/Latinx/Latinecommunity members  People impacted by climate change
o
People experiencing homelessness  Low-income communities
o 6
--- page 7 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Methods
Qualitative Data Review
Once the key focus populations were determined, OMNI and the CHA/PHIP Workgroup carefully considered existing
county-level community information gathering efforts to avoid duplication and overburdening community partners
who had already received multiple request for input. The majority of qualitative data summarized in this report was
therefore compiled from Behavioral Health Roadmap community engagement efforts as well as multiple BCPH
community engagement efforts. OMNI also conducted numerous meetings with county-level service providers and
facilitated two focus groups with Nurse Family Partnership (NFP) and Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). Qualitative
also drew from a variety of reports, including the Cross Agency Alignment Final Report, BoCoCOVID-19 Impact Study,
the 2022 Community Assessment Survey for Older Adults (CASOA) Report, Cultural Brokers Mosaics Report, multiple
Youth Advocating for Youth sessions, and various Mental and Behavioral Health Roadmap sessions held throughout
the community.
Data were explored by focus population and key themes were identified. Themes were then organized into BCPHs
existing Mental and Behavioral Health Framework (see below). Overall needs and themes were separated among
primary intervention, early intervention, and harm reduction categories. Potential strategies were also identified and
organized into the Framework’s six objectives and strategies.
7
--- page 8 ---
The Importance of Social Determinants of Health
It is important to acknowledge the importance of social determinants of health to fully contextualize
the data included in this report. The Public Health system’s role is to prevent and reduce the burden of
disease and negative health outcomes. To achieve this goal, public health focuses on both "upstream"
There are many public health models showing how multiple spheres of influence impact health outcomes and
inequities (Bay Area Regional Health Inequities, 2020; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022; Shah et al.,
2017; World Health Organization, 2010). While this CHA process focused on mental and behavioral health outcomes,
it is essential to acknowledge the significant influence that structural and social factors have on health behaviors,
outcomes, and inequities.
Social Inequities
Social inequities create the foundation for inequitable and disparate resource distributions
and resulting health outcomes. Social inequities include, but are not limited to, socioeconomic
status (education, occupation, income), race/ethnicity, immigration status, gender, and sexual
orientation.
Institutions
Institutions hold power and influence over how our social and physical environments are
shaped. Institutions include government agencies and their laws/policies, corporations and
businesses, schools, and religious organizations.
Living & Community Conditions
Where we live dictates a lot about our lives. Where our home and community are situated
can have environmental impacts (e.g., exposure to toxins), social impacts (e.g., school
funding, community violence), and economic impacts (e.g., employment opportunities) that
have large influence on our health.
Health System
Access to affordable, unbiased, timely, and physically proximate health care is imperative for
receiving preventative care and treatment of health issues. This includes physical health services,
mental and behavioral health treatment, and oral health care. Many aspects that are further
upstream (e.g., social inequities, government policies, community infrastructure) impact a
community’s health system.
Health Behaviors & Biological Factors
Health behaviors, such as substance use, nutrition, physical activity, and sexual behaviors, have a
direct impact on our health outcomes. Much of individuals’ health behaviors are influenced
heavily by further upstream factors (e.g., social behavior norms, access to healthy foods and
green space, community proximity to liquor stores). Biological factors such as age, sex, and
genetics may also increase or decrease risk for certain health outcomes.
Health Outcomes
Individual health outcomes are influenced by all of the upstream factors described above.
8
maertspU
Downstream
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
and "downstream" factors that affect health outcomes. Upstream factors may appear unrelated to health, but they are
strongly connected to a population and individuals' health outcomes. Downstream factors tend to be what have more
traditionally been focused on of as individual-level predictors of health.
8
--- page 9 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Navigating the Data in this Report
The remainder of this report summarizes Boulder County data for each of the focus populations selected. Each
section begins with a snapshot of secondary indicator data collected from various data sources. This is followed by a
summary of community input themes synthesized from Boulder County Roadmap efforts and other county-level
community engagement efforts. Below are important notes regarding how data are presented:
Understanding the Secondary Indicator Data
• Snapshots of secondary indicator data are presented for each priority population on pages titled “[Focus
Population] Snapshot: Mental Health” and “[Focus Population] Snapshot: Behavioral Health.”
• Indicator data are compared across sub-populations as well as the following geographic areas: Boulder County,
Colorado overall, and, in a few instances, the United States as a whole.
• Due to the limited sample sizes of disaggregated county-level data, the confidence intervals for many of the
indicators used in this report may be large. As a result, differences reported may not necessarily be statistically
significant. However, these trends still provide valuable insights and help gain a better understanding of the
experiences of different groups and communities in the county.
• Disparities across populations within the county are highlighted, as well as some comparisons to the state overall.
These are intended to serve as an initial starting point for BCPH reflection and dialogue for the PHIP process –
they are not intended to represent a comprehensive summary of community perspectives on MBH.
High-level comparisons of county and state data are presented in the following green boxes:
High-level county and state comparisons are
presented in a box that looks like this.
Additional context or data pertaining to Boulder County only are reported in these call-out boxes:
County-specific information is displayed in a
box like this.
Understanding Key Themes from Boulder County Community Engagement Efforts
• Qualitative data highlighting community perspectives on mental and behavioral health are presented for each
snapshot on pages titled “[Focus Population]: Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts.” Each of
these are presented in the following order:
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified are indicated with this icon:
Potential MBH Framework Strategies that emerged from the
qualitative data were synthesized and grouped into the BCPH
Mental and Behavioral Health Framework areas, indicated with this icon:
9 9
--- page 10 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Navigating the Data in this Report
It is important to note that, as with all secondary survey data, there are certain constraints in terms of analysis and
reporting of findings. These limitations arise from the way questions were phrased in the survey instrument, as well
as how the data were disaggregated by the source from which it was obtained. Results must be presented using the
same language and terms as those used in the survey instrument.
The priority populations highlighted in this report are outlined below with relevant contextual information that may
be useful in understanding the data and its limitations.
County snapshot data are highlighted and compared to Colorado and the U.S. overall to provide
an overview illustration of mental and behavioral health in Boulder County. Due to limited mental
and behavioral health data available for natural disasters, climate change, and rural/mountain
communities, this section is supplemented with qualitative context pertaining to these areas.
Maternal Health snapshot data include both Boulder and Broomfield counties due to lack of
available data for Boulder County only. Data are disaggregated by age group, ethnicity, and annual
household income. This section is followed by additional qualitative context pertaining to Mothers,
Children, and Infants.
Youthsnapshot data pertain to high school students in Boulder Valley School District and are
separated by sex and gender, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, and gender identity. The survey
data had two significant flaws that impacted our analysis and reporting: sex terms and gender terms
were conflated and the manner in which respondents’ racial/ethnic identities were reported deviate
from standard practice. Additional context is provided on this matter as data are presented.
Young Adult snapshot data focus on the experiences of individuals aged 18 to 24 years. Due to
the way disaggregated data were reported to the OMNI Research Team, snapshot data compare
young adults to the overall average of all aged 18+. This section is followed by additional qualitative
context for both the Youth and Young Adult populations.
Older Adult snapshot data focus on mental health among individuals aged 55 years or older and
compare older adult mental health to data of all adults ages 18+. Because a small percentage of
people in this age group report substance use/misuse, behavioral health data are not included. This
section is followed by additional qualitative context for Older Adult populations.
Hispanic/Latinx/Latine snapshot data focuses on mental and behavioral health amongthose
who identify as Hispanic or Latino/a/x/e. Snapshot data are reported using term Hispanic/Latinx to
align with the terms used by the survey source. This section is followed by additional qualitative
context and uses the term Latine, rather than Latinx, as this emerging term is gender inclusive and
aligns with the Spanish language.
10
10
--- page 11 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Navigating the Data in this Report
LGBTQ+ snapshot quantitative data highlight inequalities in mental and behavioral health among
those who identify as Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual or other diverse sexualities (LGB+). It is important to
note the limitations of this snapshotdata as data disaggregated by gender identity were not
available. The quantitative data in this section is thereforelimited to sexual orientation only and
highlights an important need to improve inclusive data collection practices at the county, state, and
national levels. The LGBTQ+ section that follows, highlights broader qualitative context and refers to
both sexual orientation and gender identity.
People Experiencing Homelessness snapshot data pertain to people experiencing
homelessness and include indicators related to mental and behavior health as well as additional
areas to consider. This section is followed by additional qualitative context pertaining to people
experiencing homelessness. Availability of snapshot data were particularly limited for this
population which highlights an important need to expand data collection efforts at the county and
state levels to be more inclusive of individuals experiencing homelessness.
People with Disabilities quantitative snapshot data could not be obtained for this report.
However, qualitative findings from important county-level disability needs assessment and
community engagement efforts are summarized in this section.
11
11
--- page 12 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Boulder County Overview
Geography & Culture
Boulder County is nestled at the base of the foothills of the Colorado Rockies with a
population of 330,758 according to the 2020 United States Census1. The county is comprised
ten incorporated municipalities—Boulder, Erie, Jamestown, Lafayette, Longmont, Louisville,
Lyons, Nederland, Superior, and Ward—as well as the unincorporated areas of the county.
Among the ten incorporated municipalities, the City of Boulder has the largest population,
accounting for about one third of the county’s total population, followed by Longmont,
which had a population of 98,885 in 2020. Overall, the ten incorporated municipalities
account for approximately 87% of the county’s residents. The remaining 13% live in
unincorporated areas2.
Demographics
According to the 2020 Census Count, 330,758people live in Boulder County.
13% of Boulder 18% of Boulder County residents 49% of Boulder 14.6% of Boulder County
County’s population are below 18 years old County’s population residents speak a language
lives in an (21% for Colorado). identifies as female at home other than English1.
unincorporated 16% of Boulder County residents (49% for Colorado)1.
area2. are 65 years or older
(15% for Colorado)1.
The majority (77.3%) of Boulder County identifies as non- 10% of Boulder County’s
Hispanic White, a larger share than Coloradooverall (67.0%)1. population are foreign-born1.
67.0%
Non-Hispanic White
77.3%
22.3%
Hispanic/Latinx
14.1%
3.8% 10%
Asian/Pacific Islander
5.9%
4.7%
Black
1.2%
American Indian/ 1.7%
Alaska Native 0.9%
Colorado Boulder
12
1 U.S. Census Bureau. (Accessed March 2023).U.S. Census Bureau Quickfacts.
2 Metro Denver EDC. (2021). Boulder County, Colorado –2021 Economic Profile. 1122
--- page 13 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
County Snapshot: Mental Health
The data highlighted below provide a snapshot of mental and behavioral health indicators from various sources and
pertain to individuals aged 18 years or above. All trends identified are based on these data.
Mental Health Challenges
of Boulder County residents
of Boulder County 18%
19% (nearly 1 in 5) experienced 8+
residents have ever
days where their mental health
been told they had a
was not good in the past 30
depressive disorder1.
days1.
8-13 days: 5%
The prevalence of mental health issues among 14+ days: 13%
Boulder County adults closely resembles the
prevalence among Colorado adults.
Suicide Suicide Over Time
In 2021, the rate of deaths by suicide per From 2020 to 2021, the rate of suicide deaths per
100,000 (age-adjusted) inBoulder County 100,000 (age-adjusted) rose across all three geographic
waslower compared to the Coloradobut areas4,5. However, Boulder County saw an increase of
higher than in the U.S.overall2,3. 14%, roughly 3x the increase experienced in Colorado
and the U.S. overall.
22.6
22.6
21.6
20.1
20.1
17.7
CCoOlorado
14.0
13.5 14.0 Boulder
US
Boulder Colorado US 2020 2021
1. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (2019-2021 Combined); 2. Colorado Vital Statistics Program (2021); 3. 13
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2021);4.Colorado Vital Statistics Program (2020-2021); 5.Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (2020-2021)
--- page 14 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
County Snapshot: Behavioral Health
NOTE: Some of the results displayed below are on an adjusted scale for visualization. Percentages can range from
0% -100%.
Substance Use Prescriptions Dispensed
Compared to Coloradooverall, a higher percentage of Compared to Colorado, Boulder County dispensed
residents in Boulder County used cannabis in the past 30 fewer Opioid prescriptions per 1,000 residents and
days and a lower percentage binge drank (5+ drinks for more Stimulant prescriptions per 1,000 residents6.
males and 4+ drinks for females on an occasion), smoked,
or used an e-cigarette in the past 30 days1.
Boulder County Colorado
Current 22%
Cannabis Use 19% 489
Current 16%
333
Binge Drinking 18%
199
10% Boulder County 171
Current Smoker
13% Colorado
Opioid prescriptions Stimulant prescriptions
Current E- 6%
dispensed per 1,000 dispensed per 1,000
Cigarette Use 7%
0% 22%
Access to Care Overdose Deaths
Compared to Colorado, the percentage of residents who The rate of overdose deaths due to any drug
were uninsured was lower in Boulder County7. A smaller per 100,000 (age-adjusted) is lower in Boulder
percentage of Boulder Countyresidents received County than in the Coloradooverall2.
treatment for mental health or emotional problems
relative toColoradoresidents8.
32
Boulder County Colorado
Uninsured 7% 9%
16
13%
Received
14%
Treatment
0% 15% Boulder Colorado
14
6.Colorado Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (2019); 7. Small Area Health Insurance Estimates Program, U.S.
Census Bureau (2020); 8. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (2016-2019 Combined)
--- page 15 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Natural Disasters and Climate Change:
Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts
Recent county-level community engagement efforts related to natural disasters, environment, and climate
changewere limited.A few themes surfaced from YAY youth engagement efforts with Adelante and Colie’s
Closet, and an OMNI led focus group with Nurse Family Partnership in March of 2023. There were not enough
data to determine clear potential PHIP strategies at this time, but the summary below may serve as an initial
starting point for dialogue and further exploration during the PHIP development process.
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
The Nurse Family Partnership focus group participants shared the following concerns related to infants,
young children, and parents:
• Concern around the emergency alert system not being as robust as it should be
• Fear that another natural disaster, such as the Marshall Fire can happen in the near future
• Awareness that environmentaldisasters and air quality are affecting the health of children in the
community
Youth concerns shared through YAY youth engagement efforts included the following:
• Lack of sufficient green spaces/trees in their communities
• Concerns that the water in some communities is not safe/potable
I wish people in power knew…that worrying about fixing world problems like
climate change/global warming is so stressful but more laws keep not caring and our
rights for people of different genders is very stressful.
-YAY Colie’s Closet Participant
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
The themes above suggest the following potential strategies, organized below into the
key areas of BCPH’s MBH Framework:
Address community conditions and policy
• Expand equitable access to green spaces.
• Advocate for policies that combat global warming and climate change.
Early prevention efforts
• Host community events related to emergency preparedness (e.g., how to prepare a home emergency
kit), to help reduce anxiety among families, especially those with young children.
• Host events that provide home insurance policy education to help reduce anxiety and increase
preparedness.
15
15
--- page 16 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Rural and Mountain Communities:
Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts
Available datarelated to the specific mental and behavioral health needs of rural and mountain communities
were limited. The emerging themes outlined below surfaced in Behavioral Health Roadmap conversations.
There were not enough data to determine clear potential PHIP strategies at this time, but themes below may
serve as an initial starting point for dialogue and further exploration during the PHIP development process.
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
Access
• Lack of access to mental health care in mountain communities
Specific sub-populations within rural and mountain areas needing additional support
• Youth
• Older adults experiencing isolation
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
The themes above suggest the following potential strategies, organized below into the
key areas of BCPH’s MBH Framework:
Foster community connectionsand belonging
• Promote free and accessible events or spaces for rural and mountain communities.
Increase communitycapacity for mental health
• Expand mental health services offered at Mental Health Partners to Lyons, Ned, Hygiene, and other
mountain communities
16
16
--- page 17 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Maternal Health Snapshot: Mental Health
Data in this report include highlights from the 2016-2021 Colorado Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System
(PRAMS) dataset and pertain to experiences of individuals during and after pregnancy.All trends identified are based
on these data.Please note that the data and trends identified are representative of both Boulder and Broomfield
Counties as data for Boulder County alone were not available.Results displayed below are on an adjusted scale for
visualization. Percentages can range from 0% -100%.
Overall Age
of recently pregnant people in Boulder The prevalence of depression among recently pregnant
9% and Broomfield Counties reported people varied as age increased; however, a higher
experiencing depression during percentage of those between the ages of 15 and 24
pregnancy. experienced depression during pregnancy than those 25
years or older.
of recently pregnant people in Boulder
10%
and Broomfield Counties reported 15-24 25-34 35+
25%
experiencing postpartum depression.
23%
Maternal mental health in Boulder 7% 9%
6% * 2%
and Broomfield Counties closely
0%
resembles maternal mental health
Depression during Postpartum
in Colorado overall.
pregnancy depression
Ethnicity Income
Across ethnic groups, depression during pregnancy A higher percentage of recently pregnant people with
was similar. However, a larger percentage of those annual household income of$73,000 or less in
who are Hispanic/ Latinx experienced postpartum experienced depression during or after pregnancy,
depression.Thisunderscoresa need to engage highlighting the need for additional support among
with the communityto better understand and pregnant people with low-to-moderate income.
address the underlying causes of this difference.
Depression 12% <$32k
Depression during Postpartum depression during 9%
$32k-$73k
pregnancy 7%
Hispanic/ >$73k
10% 20%
Latinx
12%
Postpartum
NH/NLx 7% 9%
18%
depression
5%
0% 25% 0% 25%
111777
* Indicates data point was suppressed.
Source: Colorado PRAMS, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, 2016-2020
--- page 18 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Maternal Health Snapshot: Behavioral Health
Overall Age
of pregnant people in Boulder and During the last trimester, drinkingwas more common
17% Broomfield Counties reported among those 35 years or older, while smokingwas more
drinking in the last 3 months of common among those between 25 and 34 years of age.
pregnancy. Data was not available for those under 25 years of age.
of pregnant people in Boulder and
8% Smoked during Drank during
Broomfield Counties reported
last trimester last trimester
consuming cannabis† at any time
during pregnancy.
25-34 years 5% 14%
of pregnant people in Boulder and
4%
Broomfield Counties reported smoking
in the last 3 months of pregnancy. 35 years+ 2% 30%
The prevalence of substance use
during pregnancy in Boulder and 0% 35%
Broomfield Counties is similar to
that of Colorado overall.
Ethnicity Income
Across ethnic groups, drinking during the last The prevalence of drinking during the last trimester
trimester and using cannabis at any time during increased as annual household income increased. The
pregnancy was more common among those who opposite is true for cannabis and smoking; use rates
are Hispanic/Latinx. Smoking during the last decreased as income increased.
trimester was more common among those who
<$32k $32k-$73k >$73k
are Non-Hispanic/Non-Latinx (NH/NLx).
35%
Drank during 25%
last trimester 14%
24%
20%
Used cannabis 13%
15%
at any time 7% Hispanic/Latinx 13% 11%
2%
NH/NLx 6% 1%
*
0%
Smoked during 2% Drank during Used cannabis Smoked during
last trimester 5% last trimester at any time last trimester
0% 35%
18
† The term cannabis is used instead of marijuana. These terms are synonymous.
* Indicates data point was suppressed.
Source: Colorado PRAMS, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, 2016-2020
--- page 19 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Infants, Children, and Maternal Snapshot:
Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts
OMNI conducted brief focus groups with staff from WIC Educatorsand the Nurse Family Partnership (NFP) Nurse
Home Visitorsin March of 2023. Additional qualitative data from community information gathering efforts was also
provided by the NFP and the Genesis Program. The summary below may serve as an initial starting point for dialogue
and further exploration during the PHIP development process.
The information/ qualitative data summarized below was provided by the following organizations:
• NFP
• WIC
• GENESIS
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
Primary Prevention
• Parenting classes through community centers are being utilized.
• Breast feeding groups offer supportive environments for new mothers.
• Home visitation programs are accessible and offer initial mental and behavioral health
support, building trust to disclose mental and behavioral health concerns.
• Programs such as Big Sisters help provide general support and education.
• Access to affordable housing and safe living situations is needed, including safe
environments/spaces to walk, exercise, etc.
• Affordable daycare is needed.
• Improvements to language access for families is an important need.
• There is a need for postpartum education and connection to services, particular among
new parents wanting to learn about postpartum mood disorders.
Early Intervention
• Seeking Behavioral Health Professionals at Clinicahelps with accessing services early on.
• Internal referral system throughout the county make seeking support easier.
• Accessible services are hard to find due to timing and location.
• Mental health consultants should be embedded in all home visitation programs and daycare centers.
• There is a need for trainings for Boulder County staff and the broader community to recognize
mental health symptoms.
Harm Reduction
• There is a need for a single point of communication in hospitals (e.g., Family Connects) for referrals
for new parents to all Boulder programs.
• Environmentaldisasters and air quality are affecting the health of children across the community.
There are moms that don’t realize they have postpartum depression and have to
wait 6 weeks to see a therapist. Once they realize it, [they] are desperate to seek help.
-Focus group participant
19
19
--- page 20 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Infants, Children, and Maternal Snapshot:
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
Findings from the qualitative data suggest the following potential strategies, organized below into the
key areas of BCPH’s MBH Framework:
Foster Community Connections and Belonging
• Invest in home visitation programs to provide mental health and substance use evaluations and
support, as participants have established connections and trust with the staff in these programs.
• Ensure hiring of additional bilingual behavioral health consultants in all BCPH client facing programs
to promote language access.
Increase community capacity for mental health and resistance
• Identify evidence-based mental health trainings for BCPH client facing programs.
• Increase training opportunities for home visitation program staff.
• Promote information sharing and referrals to services through models such as Family Connect.
• Support outreach and follow-up to connect new parents to therapists directly.
• Parent education opportunities in Socio Emotional Learning for young children.
Address community conditions and policy
• Secure fundingfor a full-time behavioral health consultant for all home visitation programs as the
current staff has limited time available across all programs.
• Advocate for a routine screening process for post-partum depression across clinics in Boulder
County and establish a centralized referral system for behavioral health clinicians to use.
Foster prosperity
• Advocate for paid parental leave. Some leave is only six weeks and post -partum healing is not
complete.
• Advocate for increased funding for affordable daycare or informal home-based childcare, such as
Family Friends and Neighbors
Early prevention efforts
• Promote events, programs, or support groups such as Big Sister, Our Center, Sister Carmen, and
breastfeeding groups, father involvement programs.
GENESIS is a very helping and welcoming program. Every teen girl is scared, lost, etc.
when they find out they are expecting a baby. GENESIS is judgment free and always
made me feel like I everything was going to be okay.
-GENESIS participant
20
20
--- page 21 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Youth Snapshot: Mental Health
The data highlighted below provide a snapshot of mental and behavioral health indicators from the 2021 Healthy Kids
Colorado Survey (HKCS) administered to high school students. All trends identified are based on these data.NOTE:
Results displayed below are on an adjusted scale for visualization. These percentages can range from 0% -100%.
Overall Sex and Gender
In the past 12 months, Relative to Maleyouth, a greater percentage of
Femaleand Gender-Queer/Non-Binary (GQ/NB)
of Boulder County youth reported experiencing mental health issues.
39%
reported experiencing
depression symptoms.
Experienced 47%
23% of Boulder County youth Depression 54%
reportedself-harming. Symptoms 29%
Female
of Boulder County youth 28%
16%
reported seriously considering Self-Harmed * GQ/NB
attempting suicide. 14%
Male
Seriously 17%
The prevalence of mental health issues
Considered 38%
among youth in the county overall
Suicide 11%
closely resembles the prevalence
among youth in Colorado overall.
0% 65%
* Indicates data point was suppressed.
Race/Ethnicity
Across racial and ethnic groups, mental health issues were most
common among Multi-Racial†youth, highlightinga need for
engaging with the community to better understand and address the
underlying causes of this disparity.
65% Multi-Racial† White Hispanic/Latinx Only Asian There were largermental
health disparities between
Multi-Racial†youthand
50% non-Multi-Racial youthin
Boulder Countythan in
40%
38%
35% 36% Colorado overall.
23%
21%
18%17%
16%12%10%
0%
Experienced Self-Harmed Seriously
Depression Symptoms Considered Suicide
† HKCS reported youth who self-identified as Hispanic/Latinx and any other race/ethnicity as Multi-Racial. By the definition
used by U.S. federal government agencies, race and ethnicity are defined separately and results for these students would 2211
be reported in Hispanic/Latinx figures.
Source: Healthy Kids Colorado High School Survey, 2021
--- page 22 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Youth Snapshot: Mental Health
Sexual Orientation Gender Identity
A larger percentage of Lesbian, Gay, or Bisexual (LGB)
youth reported experiencing mental health issues
compared to Heterosexualyouth.
Compared to Cisgender youth, Gender-
Expansive‡youthwere:
Experienced
33% 65% 3x 3.3x
Depression
more likely to have more likely to have
Self-Harmed 15% 50%
experienced seriously considered
depression symptoms attempting suicide
Seriously
Considered 10% 36%
Suicide
0% 65%
Youth Snapshot: Behavioral Health
Overall
In the past 30 days,
26% of Boulder County youth reported
consumingalcohol.
Substance use among
16% of Boulder County youth reported youth in Boulder County
using cannabis. overall closely resembles
substance use among
youth in Colorado overall.
16% of Boulder County youth reported
vaping.
The majority of Boulder County
youth reported not using
substances in the past 30 days.
22
‡Gender expansive is defined as those who identify as transgender or are unsure of their gender identity.
Source: Healthy Kids Colorado High School Survey, 2021
--- page 23 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Youth Snapshot: Behavioral Health
Race/Ethnicity Sex and Gender
Across racial/ethnic groups, substance use was most Past 30-day substance use was most common among
common among WhiteandMulti-Racial†youth. youth who identified as FemaleorGender-
Queer/Non-Binary.
30%
Current Female GQ/NB Male
24%
Alcohol
35%
20%
Use
16% 33%
White 21%21% 22% 20%
18% 17% 17%
Current 15%
18% Multi-Racial† 12%
Cannabis
10% Asian
Use 0%
8%
Hispanic/Latinx Only Current Current Current
Alcohol Use Cannabis Use Vape Use
0% 35%
Sexual Orientation Gender Identity
Compared to Heterosexualyouth, a higher
percentage of Lesbian, Gay, or Bisexualyouth
reported past 30-day use of all three substances.
Heterosexual LGB
A smaller percentage of Gender-
Expansive youth‡reported
Current
26% 34% consuming alcohol in the past 30
Alcohol Use
days compared to Cisgender youth
(16% and 27%, respectively).
Current
14% 28%
Cannabis Use
Current
15% 24%
Vape Use
0% 35%
23
Source: Healthy Kids Colorado High School Survey, 2021
--- page 24 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Young Adult Snapshot: Mental Health
The data highlighted below provide a snapshot of mental and behavioral health indicators from the Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance Survey and pertain to individuals aged 18 years or above. Indicators are based on multiple years of
combined data using the most recent years, which range from 2016-2021. All trends identified are based on these data
and compare young adults to the overall average (all ages). NOTE: Results displayed below are on an adjusted scale for
visualization. These percentages can range from 0% -100%.
Population Characteristics Mental Health Days
In Boulder County, a larger percentage of Young Adults
reported a high number of days where their mental health
was not good in the past 30 days2compared to the average
across all aged 18+.
of Boulder County’s
14% 40%
population are young
adults1(18-24 years 9% 8-13 days
14+ days
old), compared to 9%
of Colorado’stotal
5%
population. 25%
13%
0%
Young Adults Average
(All Age 18+)
Depressive Disorder Diagnoses Access to Care
In Boulder County, a higher percentage of In Boulder County, a smaller percentage of Young Adults
Young Adults have ever been told they had a received treatment for a mental health condition or emotional
depressive disorder2compared tothe average problem3compared to theaverage of all aged 18+. In
of all aged 18+. Colorado overall, the percentages are similar.
15% 15%
14%
Young 13%
26%
Adults 9%
Average
19% 0%
(All Age 18+) Young Average (All Young Average (All
Adults Age 18+) Adults Age 18+)
0% 30% Boulder County Colorado
Young adult mental health in Boulder County closely resembles young adult mental health
in Colorado overall. Even though trends are similar, efforts are needed to provide
additional mental health support to those aged 18-24.
2244
1. U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates (2021); 2. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey
(2019-2021 Combined); 3. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (2016-2019 Combined)
--- page 25 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Young Adult Snapshot: Behavioral Health
Substance Use
Although most Young Adults did not report smoking e-cigarettes,
using cannabis, or binge drinking (5+ drinks for males and 4+ drinks
for females on an occasion)2in the past 30 days, these behaviors
were more common among Young Adults compared to the
average across all ages.
The prevalence of
Young Adults Average (All Age 18+) substance use among
35% young adults in Boulder
County is similar tothat
30% 29% of Colorado overall.
27%
22%
16%
7%
0%
Current Current Current
E-Cigarette Smoker Cannabis User Binge Drinker
2255
--- page 26 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Youth & Young Adult Snapshot:
Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts
Several youth engagement efforts throughout Boulder County programs resulted in three reports from April 2021 to
April 2023. The reports focused on cross-agency collaboration throughout the county, needs in schools, and overall
mental health and substance use reduction in youth’s communities. These reports mention youth throughout their
findings, but do not specify ages. The summary below may serve as an initial starting point for dialogue and further
exploration during the PHIP development process. Qualitative data were provided by the following organizations:
• Colie’s Closet Lafayette Youth Advisory Commission • St VrainValley School District Community
Feedback Session • Community Health Division (CHD) Programs
• Longmont Children, Youth, and Families Feedback Session • Community Mental Health Initiative Healthy Eating
• Natural Highs • Active Living (HEAL)YAY efforts through BCPH
• Teens Inc. • Adelante
• Youth Opportunities Advisory Board
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
Primary Prevention
• Lack of power among youth and ageism
• Disjoined communication and efforts among Boulder County youth programs
• Need for student education about neuroscience around mental health and substance use effects
• Workforce shortages in schools
• Developmental and academic delays for key student groups in school
• Need for education about healthy relationships, both with family and romantically, as well as
healthy communication, both with family and peers
• Additional positive spaces or programs for youth to interact, such as community centers and
playgrounds, as peer support can offer important mental health protection
• Fears related to safety in youth environments, particularly regarding weapons and school
lockdowns as they are identified causes for poor mental health
Early Intervention
• A need for addressing a variety of specific issues, including, new behavior changes in students at
school; physical and mental health concerns; and problems at school, work, or home
• Increase opportunities for support and connection in community.
Harm Reduction
• Concerns about increased poor mental health symptoms, complex trauma, and suicidality in youth
• Burnout and exhaustion reported by school staff, parents, therapists, and students
• Need for independent housing resources for youth
• Financial insecurities can prevent access to care
• Substances and dispensaries in community are interfering with youth mental health
26
26
--- page 27 ---
Boulder County
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Community Health Assessment
Youth & Young Adult Snapshot:
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
Findings from the qualitative data suggest the following potential strategies, organized below into the
key areas of BCPH’s MBH Framework:
Foster community connectionsand belonging
• Relay information effectively to community about community events and mental health supports.
• Increase free or low-cost, safe sober spaces and activities for youth to connect.
• Foster community in neighborhoods through common spaces and events.
• Destigmatize and validate mental health symptoms and stress among youth through positive spaces.
• Invest in teen and parent peer mentorship programs.
Increase community capacity for mental health and resistance
• Provide training for adults related to youth mental health and positive youth development, as well as
training for parents and youth, including Social Emotional Learning.
• Promote programs for youth that address bullying and suicide.
Address community conditions and policy
• Increase funding for schools and mental health programs, such as Youth Opportunities Program
• Promote mental health and menstrual leave policies.
• Support equitable pay for staff that support youth.
• Reduce access to substances for youth.
Increase community engagement
• Include youth in board of health decisions and ensure advisors in all Community HealthDivision programs.
• Consider paying youth to become advisors and/or to design prevention initiatives for peers.
Foster prosperity
• Increase safe routes, paths, and public transportation for youth to get to employment.
• Create safe physical spaces in neighborhoods free of violence, substance use, and high traffic.
• Offer diverse range of prosocial education and career opportunities.
• Advocate for affordablehealthcare, including funding for short-term mental health services.
• Promote financial wellbeing and security among families and youth.
Early prevention efforts
• Offer healthand resource fairs for youth, parents, school staff, and community.
• Increase availability of therapists for youth, such as integrating in spaces where youth spend their time.
• Foster nutrition through accessible meals and snacks.
• Promote positive interventions at schools rather than punishment.
• Share information about telehealth and in person services (particularly outside of school hours) to
promote accessibility.
• Partner with pediatricians to provide mental health and substance use screenings during well child
visits and easily share information to schools with a release of information.
…to have activities/programs that combat the regular culture in the school…things that
promote healthy pleasures and wholesome self-care instead of glorifying addiction and
unhealthy relationships. Most kids/teens would rather be healthy and happy but it's just
not something that's cool to do. Creating spaces where vulnerability and connection thrive.
-Natural Highs YAY Feedback Session Participant
27
27
--- page 28 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Older Adults Snapshot: Mental Health
The data highlighted below provide a snapshot of mental health indicators from various sources. All trends identified
are based on these data. All trends identified are based on these dataand compare older adults (those 55 years or
older) to the overall average (all ages). NOTE: Results displayed below are on an adjusted scale for visualization.
These percentages can range from 0% -100%.
Population Characteristics Depressive Disorder Diagnoses
Compared to the overall average across all Boulder County
adults, a larger percentage of those55 to 64 years old
have ever been told they had a depressive disorder2.
of Boulder County
28% residents are 55
25%
years of age or
24%
older1, compared to
19%
27% of Colorado’s
14%
total population.
0%
Average Age 55 - 64 Age 65+
55-64 years: 12%
(All Age 18+)
65+ years: 16%
Mental Health Days
Compared the averageacross all Boulder
County adults, a larger percentage of those
55 to 64 years old reported a high number
of days where their mental health was not
good in the past 30 days2.
25%
Average (All Ages) 28.6
8-13 days
4% Age 55 - 64 42.2
14+ days
5%
Age 65+ 58.7
17%
13% 2% Average (All Ages) 9.8
6%
Age 55 - 64 22.1
0%
Average Age 55 - 64 Age 65+ Age 65+ 9.0
(All Age 18+)
Compared to Colorado overall, a larger percentage of Older Adults aged 55-64
yearsin Boulder County reported mental health challenges. In Boulder County,
Older Adults aged 55+have higher rates of death by suicide compared to
Colorado residents in the same age group.
2288
1. U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates (2021); 2. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
Survey (2019-2021 Combined); 3. Colorado Vital Statistics Program (2020-2021 Combined)
elaM
elameF
Suicide
The rate of deaths by suicide per 100,000 is higher among Older
Adults (crude)3compared to the rate across all Boulder County
residents (age-adjusted)3. Across age groups, rates are highest
among males aged 55 years or older. Females aged 55 to 64
years have higher rates than females in all other age groups.
--- page 29 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Older Adults: Key Themes from Community
Engagement Efforts
They key themes outlined below were summarized from Behavioral Health Roadmap conversations, as well as
from recent community engagement efforts facilitated by the Area Agency on Agency for their strategic planning
process. Key data points from the 2022 Community Assessment Survey for Older Adults (CASOA) are also
featured for additional context. The summary below is intended to serve as an initial starting point for dialogue
and further exploration of key community needs during BCPH’s PHIP development process.
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
Key CASOA Data points:
• 85% of Boulder County older adults said their overall mental health/emotional wellbeing was “excellent
or good.”​
• 42% of Boulder County older adults said feeling depressed was “at least aminor problem,”​ an increase
from 33% in 2018.
• 37% of Boulder County older adults said feeling lonely or isolated was “at leasta minor problem.”​
• 63% of Boulder County older adults said the availability of quality mental health care was “fair or poor.”
Primary Prevention
• Need for addressing impacts of pandemic and resulting increase in loneliness and social isolation
• Accessibility and availability of mental health counseling as the older adults population grows; particularly
for older adults struggling to afford services (i.e., those on fixed or limited incomes, including middle
income older adults)
• Living in an ageist society creates barrier to accessing necessary services including existing older age
focused classes and end-of-life services
• Increased risk of suicide among older males
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
Foster Community and Service Connection
• Lead with anti-ageism to expand utilization of older adult services.
• Increase funding to support access to the network of existing older adult services.
• Implement more multi-generational approaches and settings to connect people of all ages.
• Expand awareness of social connection opportunities and affinity-based programming for subgroups
of older adults (e.g., Rainbow Elders for LGBTQ+ older adults).
• Utilize the existing aging network (BCAAA and municipal-level older adult services) to increase
awareness of services to support older adults and their caregivers.
• Engage non-traditional partners in outreach to older adults and caregivers.
• Increase availability, affordability, and accessibility of mental and behavioral health services for older
adults and their caregivers.
29
29
--- page 30 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Hispanic/Latinx/Latine Snapshot: Mental Health
†
The data highlighted below provide a snapshot of mental and behavioral health indicators from various sources and
pertain to individuals aged 18 years or above. All trends identified are based on these data.Some sources did not have
a breakdown of ethnicity only.In this case, White only, Non-Hispanic/Non-Latinx (NH/NLx) was used for the comparison
group. NOTE: Results displayed below are on an adjusted scale for visualization. These percentages can range from 0% -
100%.
Population Characteristics Mental Health Days
In Boulder County, a higher percentage of Hispanic/Latinx
residents reported 14 or more days where their mental
health was not good in the past 30 days2compared to
White only, Non-Hispanic/Non-Latinxresidents. In
of Boulder County Colorado, percentages were similar across the two groups.
residents identify as
14%
Hispanic/Latinx1,
White only, NH/NLx Hispanic/Latinx
compared to 22% of 20%
Colorado’stotal
population.
16%
13% 13%
12%
0%
Access to Care Boulder Colorado
In Boulder County, a smaller percentage of
Hispanic/Latinx residents received treatment for
a mental health condition or emotional problem3
compared to White only, Non-Hispanic/Non-
Latinxresidents.
A larger percentage of
Hispanic/Latinxresidents in
Colorado overall received treatment
White only, NH/NLx 16% than in Boulder County (10% and 5%,
respectively). This highlights a need
for additional efforts to provide
Hispanic/Latinx 5%
services to this community within
the county.
†The term Hispanic/Latinx is used in this section to align with the terms used by the survey source.
30
1. U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates (2021); 2. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey
(2019-2021 Combined); 3. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (2016-2019 Combined)
--- page 31 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Hispanic/Latinx/Latine Snapshot: Mental & Behavioral Health
Suicide Suicide Over Time
In 2021, the rate of deaths by suicide per 100,000 (age- In Boulder County, the rate of deaths by suicide
adjusted) in Boulder County was lower among per 100,000 (age-adjusted) Hispanic/Latinx
Hispanic/Latinxresidents than Non-Hispanic/Non-Latinx residents decreased between 2020 and 2021, in
residents of any race4. comparison to the rate increase seen among
Non-Hispanic/Non-Latinx residents of any race5.
20.2
NH/NLx 20.2 17.0
Hispanic/
13.0
Latinx 16.2
13.0
2020 2021
Substance Use
In Boulder County, a lower percentage of Hispanic/Latinx
residentsused cannabis, binge drank (5+ drinks for males
Overdose Deaths
and 4+ drinks for females on an occasion), or used e-
cigarettesin the past 30 days compared to White only,
In 2021, the rate of overdose deaths in Boulder
Non-Hispanic/Non-Latinx. A higher percentage of
County due to any drug per 100,000 (age-
Hispanic/ Latinx residents reported smoking in the past
adjusted) was lower among Hispanic/Latinx4
30 days2.
residents than those who are Non-Hispanic/Non-
Latinx.
35% Hispanic/Latinx White only, NH/NLx
12.7
24%
17%
7.1
13%
12% 12%
9%
8%
5%
0%
Current Binge Current Current Current E-Cig
Hispanic/Latinx Non-Hispanic/
Drinker Cannabis User Smoker Smoker
Non-Latinx
31
4. Colorado Vital Statistics Program (2021); 5. Colorado Vital Statistics Program (2020-2021)
--- page 32 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Hispanic/Latinx/Latine Snapshot:
Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts
Qualitative data from Boulder County’s Hispanic/Latinx community engagement efforts were compiled from three
reports developed between May 2019 to February 2023. The reports included information from multiple key
Hispanic/Latinx organizations throughout the county. The focus of the reports ranged from COVID-19 impacts,
cultural brokers or supports in the community, and BCPH’s staff identification of needs.
The qualitative data summarized below was provided by the following organizations:
• Cultural Brokers Resiliency Program • AFC+A Green Promoters
• Formal Cultural Brokers • Boulder County Public Health P & E
• City of Boulder -Community Connectors • Boulder County Office of County Administrator
• ELPASO Movement Community Organizers • I Have a Dream Foundation of Boulder County
• AMISTAD Health Promoters
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
Primary Prevention
• Need for racial equity work to be at the forefront of improving mental and behavioral health
• Lack of available and accessible services such as telehealth available in languages other than
English
• Need for community-based and community-promoted resources accessible in Spanish
• Need for services that are culturally responsive including bicultural supports and increased
diversity of behavioral health providers
• Limited capacity for use of technology
• Need for affinity group gatherings to help build community
• Concerns about mental health beingstigmatized in Latine communities
• Lack of knowledge about mental health symptoms and/or resources for mental health support,
particularly for community members who do not have US documentation
Early Intervention
• Need for expansions of effective programs such as the PromotoresModel in El Centro AMISTAD
• Lack of diverse tools for recognizing mental health symptoms that work across cultures
Harm Reduction
• Need for increased collaboration with communities of faith to address mental health needs
• Concerns of burnout experienced by cultural brokers that are overworked help the
community navigate resources
32
32
--- page 33 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Hispanic/Latinx/Latine Snapshot:
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
Findings from the qualitative data suggest the following potential strategies, organized below into the
key areas of BCPH’s MBH Framework:
Foster community connectionsand belonging
• Increase Spanish language support groups and community activities.
• Fund local places of faith to offer Spanish support groups and activities.
• Increase access to bilingual and biculturalmental health providers.
• Increase access to promotores.
• Promote events or organizations that directly reach out to the Latine community about services (e.g.,
Casa de la Esperanza, El Centro AMISTAD).
• Support free or low-cost outdoor activities for Latineyouth.
I have been watching the Amistad & Suma Center share information about mental
health issues. That's where I know there are resources available
-BoCoCOVID Impact Study participant
Increase community capacity for mental health and resistance
• Promote Latinefocused family strengthening interventions or trainings.
• Increase Latine behavioral health workforce.
• Provide Latineparent support to navigate school systems.
Address community conditions and policy
• Latine community relies on Medicaid to receive mental health support. Advocate for affordable mental
health services and programs that are accessible.
Early intervention efforts
• Support primary care clinics that Latine communities already go to and know about for behavioral
health services such as ClinicaPeople’s clinic, SaludFamily Health Centers, and Kaiser.
We need more funds because we do not have the same rights as citizens, for
example unemployment. That [elected officials and representatives] help more in
mental health, that they inform us more, that they call us and give us services with
Latino people; it is not enough for a therapist to be bilingual, it is the cultural part that
does not help us to receive services in the best way…
-BoCoCOVID Impact Study participant
33
33
--- page 34 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
LGBTQ+ Snapshot: Mental Health
The data highlighted below provide a snapshot of mental and behavioral health indicators from various sources and
pertain to individuals aged 18 years or above. All trends identified are based on these data and focus on sexual
orientation only. Data disaggregated by gender identity were not available. NOTE: Results displayed below are on an
adjusted scale for visualization. These percentages can range from 0% -100%.
Population Characteristics Depressive Disorder Diagnoses
Compared to Heterosexualresidents, a higher
percentage of LGB+ residents have ever been told
they had a depressive disorder2, underscoring the
need for additional support for this group within the
of Boulder County community.
7% residents identify as
Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual or other
LGB+ 38%
diverse sexualities
(LGB+)1,compared
to 5% of Colorado’s
total population.
Hetero-
18%
sexual
0% 40%
Mental Health Days
A larger percentage of LGB+ residents reported a high
number of days where their mental health was not good
in the past 30 days2relative to Heterosexualresidents.
40%
Compared to Colorado LGB+
8-13 Days residents, a lower percentage of
8% 14+ Days LGB+ residents in Boulder
County reported a 14 or more
days where their mental health
was not good in the last 30 days
5% (34% and 24%, respectively).
24%
12%
0%
LGB+ Heterosexual
3344
1. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (2018-2020 Combined); 2. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey
(2019-2021 Combined)
--- page 35 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
LGBTQ+ Snapshot: Mental & Behavioral Health
Access to Care Substance Use
Relative to Heterosexualresidents, ahigher percentage A higher percentage LGB+ residents have binge drank,
of LGB+ residentsin Boulder County and Colorado have used cannabis, or smoked cigarettes in the past 30
received treatment for mental health or emotional days2compared to Heterosexualresidents.
problems3.
3 LGB+ Heterosexual
35%
Boulder 32%
2 13% 19%
County 27%
22%
1Colorado 13% 28% 15%
12%
9%
0%
0 Current Current Current
0% 30% Binge Drinking Cannabis Use Smoker
There were smaller substance
LGB+ residents in Boulder County may benefit
use disparities between LGB+
from additional treatment services, including
and Heterosexual residents in
treatment that is culturally responsive.
Boulder County than Colorado.
Substance Use, County & State
Compared to Colorado LGB+residents, a higher percentage
of Boulder County LGB+ residents have binge drank in the
past 30 days2and a lower percentage have used cannabis or
smoked cigarettes in the past 30 days.
Boulder County Colorado
36%
32%
26% 27%
18%
12%
Current Current Current
Binge Drinking Cannabis Use Smoker
35
3. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (2016-2019 Combined)
--- page 36 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
LGBTQ+ Snapshot:
Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts
Community engagement for this section referencedthe LGBTQ+ community as a whole and often did not separate
the differences in needs between sexual orientation and gender identity. These communities were often combined
but it is important to recognize that these needs or strategies should be tailored to fit all sexual orientation and
gender identities. In addition, certain sexual orientations, such as asexual, and intersex individuals were not
mentioned. Engagement efforts were gathered between November 2022 and March 2023 from schools and the
Boulder County roadmap efforts. The summary below may serve as an initial starting point for dialogue and further
exploration during the PHIP development process.
The qualitative data summarized below was provided by the following organizations:
• St VrainValley School District Community
• Roadmap Discussions
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
Primary Prevention
• Accessing gender affirming care
• Informationabout LGBTQIA+ identities are limited to parents
• Safety is needed
• LGBTQ+ youth feel they can’t be themselves without fear of losing safety
• Individuals with diverse identities still feel marginalized and are being bullied
• Heteronormative practices across systems
Early Intervention
• More affirming spaces needed
• GSAs in middle and high schools are working well
• Programs like OASOS and Out Boulder are working well
• Challenge with accessing affirming spaces if LGBTQ+ individuals are not out
Harm Reduction
• Heightened stress due to non-affirming homes
• Suicidall ideation and self-harm is high in LGBTQ+ teens
• Effects of the local and global politics affecting LGBTQ+ individuals
• Crisis support like the Trevor project line are working well
• Runaways and lack of housing due to lack of support for some LGBTQ+ individuals
36
36
--- page 37 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
LGBTQ+ Snapshot:
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
Reports and data gathered throughout Boulder County suggested:
Foster community connectionsand belonging
• Hiring diverse mental health providers that identify as LGBTQ+.
• Fund LGBTQ+ individuals to work with Gender and Sexualities Alliances (GSA) at schools.
• Highlight individuality within the LGBTQ+ community as each identity is different.
• Support LGBTQ+ serving centers and offer opportunities to make these programs accessible, such as
providing transportation.
Increase community capacity for mental health and resistance
• Gender affirming training offered to all therapists.
• Increase safe and gender affirming residential treatment.
Address community conditions and policy
• Support and advocate for more LGBTQ+ individuals in positions of power.
• Advocate against anti-LGBTQ+ policies.
Early prevention efforts
• Increase opportunities for pride events.
• Increase opportunities for GSA summits.
• Audit for assessment tools, eligibility requirements, etc. to ensure they don’t favor
heteronormative responses.
• Family-centered programming for parents that are unsupportive, especially if this is known early
on by the youth.
37
37
--- page 38 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Homelessness Snapshot: Characteristics and Mental & Behavioral Health
The data highlighted below come from a Point-in-Time (PIT) snapshot of homelessness in the seven county Metro
Denver Continuum of Care on the night of January 24, 2022. NOTE: Results displayed below are on an adjusted scale for
visualization. These percentages can range from 0% -100%.
Overall Frequency of Experiencing Homelessness
457 A higher percentage of people experiencing homelessness in
Boulder County were homeless for the first time compared to
chronically homeless.
people in Boulder County
experiencing homelessness
First Time Homeless 50%
1
Chronically Homeless 27%
1.4
people experiencing homelessness in 0% 50%
Boulder County per 1,000 residents
A higher percentage of people experiencing homelessness
in Boulder County were homeless for the first time
compared to the average of those in all 7 counties where
the PIT survey was conducted (50% and 36%, respectively).
Shelter Status
In Boulder County, the majority of people experiencing
homelessness were sheltered. Less than 2 in 10 people Mental and Behavioral Health
experiencing homelessness in the county were
Approximately 1 in 3 of people experiencing
unshelteredthe night of the survey.
homelessness in Boulder County reported having a
mental health concern and 1 in 4 reported having a
18%
substance use concern.
Unsheltered
40%
Sheltered
34%
27%
82%
A smaller percentage of people
0%
experiencing homelessness in Boulder
Mental Health Substance Use
County were unshelteredthan the average
Concern Concern
of the 7 counties where the PIT survey was
conducted (18% and 30%, respectively).
333888
Source: Metro Denver Homeless Initiative, 2022 Point in Time Count
--- page 39 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
People Experiencing Homelessness Snapshot:
Additional Context from Community Engagement Efforts
The informationsummarized below represents emerging themes from the behavioral health roadmap
convenings on Harm Reduction, Recovery, and Treatment.
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
Primary Prevention
• Lack of affordable, safe housing options
Early Intervention
• Lack of early supports for people experiencing homelessness becoming
destabilized
• Lack of ongoing supportive and sober living homes
• Lack of housing options for MAT clients, individuals with criminal history or
people who use meth.
Harm Reduction
• Stigma
• Lack of drop in options for PUD
Potential MBH Framework Strategies
Increase community capacity for mental health and resistance
• Train providers on trauma-informed housing programs.
Address community conditions and policy
• Housing options and navigation between levels of support/care including
long-term supportive housing.
• Housing first and trauma-informed housing models.
Increase community engagement
• Ensure individuals experiencing homelessness have ongoing engagement in
planning efforts.
39
39
--- page 40 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
People with Disabilities: Key Themes from
Community Engagement Efforts
Boulder County Housing and Human Services partnered with the National Center for Start Services Institute on
Disability, University of New Hampshire to assess service and support needs for individuals with disabilities.
Information gathering took place between October-December of 2022 and included 113 community members
who responded to an online survey, 51 individuals who participated in virtual focus groups, and 28 family
caregivers who took part in telephonic surveys (FamilyExperiences Interview Schedule/FEIS). The full report is
available upon request through Boulder County Housing and Human Services.
Key Themes and/or Needs Identified
The National Center for START Services/UNH identified 4 core themes with corresponding
recommendations that are summarized below. Key system-level needed improvements included the
following:
Access to Outpatient Mental
Linkages Across Systems
Health Services & Supports
• Addressing highrates of polypharmacy
• Fostering increasedlinkages and
• Increasing access to crisis services
care coordination across systems
• Increasing access to providers accepting
• Better integrating IDD and MH
Medicaid, psychiatrists and other
services so that systems are less
prescribers
separated
Access to ordinary IDD
services for people with Crisis Response
IDD/BI-MH
• Promoting knowledge regarding
• Addressing Bias-related access issues how to access crisis services
• Promoting capacity/training to support people • Addressing the overuse of police
with IDD who have MH needs and emergency department for
• Increasing access to caregivers (current needs
shortages) • Meeting the need for stabilization
• Increasing access to transportation, services
employment, recreation, and community
inclusion.
40
40
--- page 41 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Capacity Assessment
Method
The capacity assessment process integrated data from a variety of sources to identify key strengths related to mental
and behavioral health (MBH) services in Boulder County as well as opportunities for growth in the county.
In March of 2023, BCPH also conducted an internal assessment of current capacity to meet the goals of current
community needs that align with the six objectives outlined in the BCPH MBH Framework (see page 7 of this report.)
Internal capacity scores were determined through an internal BCPH survey with staff from all programs with MBH
components. Staff rated the state of their program's resources to meet current program goals on a scale of 1-3, with
1=significantly under-resourced;2=more resources needed; and 3=sufficient resources. BCPH internal capacity
scores were calculated by averaging scores for each Objective across all programs. Averaged scores are represented
in the charts below by color based on the range of scores (2.0 to 2.5), with 2.0-2.1 being represented in red, 2.2-2.3
represented in yellow, and 2.4-2.5 represented in red, to represent relative capacity across programs, as represented
in the chart below.
BCPH Internal Capacity Analysis Ranges
2.4 – 2.5 2.2 - 2.3 2.0 - 2.1
/3.0 /3.0 /3.0
OMNI Institute reviewed these findings as well as information on additional programs in the county to assess the
total system capacity for each of the six MBH Frameworkobjectives. Strengths and opportunities were specifically
called out for each Objective area.
These findings are broken down into strengths and opportunities for continued exploration and
development based on each Objective from the MBH Framework across the following pages.
41
4411
--- page 42 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Capacity Assessment
Objective One: Foster community connections and belonging
The information below describes the capacity of BCPH to meet the demands of community needs that are relevant
to Objective One as well as the strengths and opportunities for growth within the broader behavioral health system
to foster community connections and belonging.
Current capacity within BCPH in the goals supporting this objective are:
Increase trusted adults Reduce social isolation, Equity and belonging
and positive adult decrease stigma, connect efforts, prosocial groups
relationships for youth to resources for priority populations
2.4 /3.0 2.3 /3.0 2.1 /3.0
Capacity within BCPH to meet current community needs within Objective One varies by specific goals. Additional
strengths and opportunities within the behavioral health system to support this objective. These are outlined below.
Opportunity
Strength
• There are many resources to support increasing • Because capacity within BCPH is high to increase
positive adult-youth relationships within BCPH and positive adult relationships for youth and there are
in other organizations around Boulder County. many community resources devoted to reducing
• The highest number of resources from organizations social isolation and decreasing stigma, these
outside of BCPH that are devoted to any one goal resources can be leveraged to improve access to
seek to decrease isolation and stigma, making this a prosocial groups for priority populations that have
key strength of the behavioral health system in limited access to these support services.
Boulder County.
• There are many resources for prosocial groups
among LGBTQIA+ individuals, people with substance
use disorders, and Latineindividuals.
42
4422
--- page 43 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Capacity Assessment
Objective Two: Increase community capacity for population
level mental health and resilience
The information on this page describes the capacity of BCPH to meet the demands of community needs that are
relevant to Objective Two as well as the strengths and opportunities for growth within the broader behavioral
health system to increase community capacity for population level mental health and resilience.
Current capacity within BCPH in the goals supporting this objective are:
Training and technical Share and interpret data Health promotion efforts
assistance to community to help community make
to improve outcomes data-driven decisions
2.0 /3.0 2.1 /3.0 2.3 /3.0
While capacity within BCPH to meet current community needs may be low in two out of three goal areas and
moderate in the third area, there are additional strengths and opportunities within the behavioral health system to
support this objective. These are outlined below.
Opportunity
Strength
• Sufficient resources to support ongoing sharing and • Because there are already many successful efforts
interpretation of data are found in organizations to train and provide technical assistance to
that support LGBTQIA+ individuals, people with community partners, those programs could be
substance use disorders, pregnant and post-partum leveraged to provide additional training to serve
people, and people with disabilities that all have focus populations with intersecting identities.
sufficient or emerging programs that share or • Organizations that serve people with substance
interpret data to aid in community decision making. use disorders and people who use drugs have
• Organizations that serve people with substance use more robust programming in place around data
disorders and people who use drugs are a key sharing and interpretation. Partnerships with these
strength in this area. organizations may be leveraged to train partners
• Organizations that serve people with substance use serving adjacent populations in the data sharing
disorders and people who use drugs have partial or and interpretation processes.
sufficient programming to support MBH promotion. • Additionally, some organizations have strong
• The same is true for some organizations that serve health promotion programming in spite of
adolescents—notably the two public school districts insufficient resources to support other elements of
that serve Boulder County: Boulder Valley and Saint Objective Two. These programs could be expanded
VrainSchool Districts. to include activities entailing data sharing and
providing training and technical assistance to the
community more broadly.
43
4433
--- page 44 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Capacity Assessment
Objective Three: Address community conditions and policy
The information on this page describes the capacity of BCPH to meet the demands of community needs that are
relevant to Objective Three as well as the strengths and opportunities for growth within the broader behavioral
health system to address community conditions and policy.
Current capacity within BCPH in the goals supporting this objective are:
Engage in state and local Enhance place Build support for policy
policy efforts change
2.3 /3.0 2.3 /3.0 2.1 /3.0
While capacity within BCPH to meet current community needs may be moderate in two out of three goal areas and
low in the third area, there are additional strengths and opportunities within the behavioral health system to
support this objective. These are outlined below.
Opportunity
Strength
• Organizations with the most resources devoted to • BCPH could increase collaboration with
this objective are focused on working with specific organizations already doing work around
populations (e.g., LGBTQIA+ community members, community conditions and policy to help expand
people with substance use disorders, people with those efforts or to support organizations in
mental health needs), and therefore have existing promoting their efforts with others in the
infrastructure to connect with community members community. This would leverage and enhance the
more broadly around community conditions and policy-focused work already happening in the
policy. county.
44
4444
--- page 45 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Capacity Assessment
Objective Four: Increase community engagement through
collaboration and leadership
The information on this page describes the capacity of BCPH to meet the demands of community needs that are
relevant to Objective Four as well as the strengths and opportunities for growth within the broader behavioral
health system to increase community engagement through collaboration and leadership.
Current capacity within BCPH in the goals supporting this objective are:
Convene community Assess community need Meaningfully involve
coalitions and and gather community community in planning
partnerships input and implementation
2.4 /3.0 2.3 /3.0 2.4 /3.0
Capacity within BCPH to meet current community needs is sufficient in two out of three goal areas and moderate in
the third. Additional strengths and opportunities within the behavioral health system to support this objective are
outlined below.
Opportunity
Strength
• Many BCPH programs with dedicated community • BCPH can capitalize on existing capacity to convene
engagement activities already have a high capacity community coalitions and involve the community
to work toward this objective. in assessing ongoing MBH needs, planning, and
• Outside of BCPH, there are many programs working implementation of the PHIP.
with LGBTQIA+ individuals that share other • BCPH should also continue to build on their
intersecting identities, such as LGBTQIA+ older support for other organizations in engaging and
adults and LGBTQIA+ Latinecommunity members, serving people facing housing or food insecurity,
offering opportunities for collaboration across children with special needs, teen parents, and
communities and programs. youth who use drugs or alcohol.
45
4455
--- page 46 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Capacity Assessment
Objective Five: Foster prosperity
The information on this page describes the capacity of BCPH to meet the demands of community needs that are
relevant to Objective Five as well as the strengths and opportunities for growth within the broader behavioral
health system to foster prosperity within the community.
Current capacity within BCPH in the goals supporting this objective are:
Economic Self Sufficiency Quality of Life Promote meaningful
contributions & service
learning opportunities
2.3 /3.0 2.3 /3.0 2.1 /3.0
While capacity within BCPH to meet current community needs may be moderate in two out of three goal areas and
low in the third area, there are additional strengths and opportunities within the behavioral health system to
support this objective. These are outlined below.
Opportunity
Strength
• There are many organizations with programs to • There are many organizations focused on people
support economic self-sufficiency that serve a broad who are low-income or facing housing insecurity
swath of clients because they are focused on people that serve clients who may have intersecting
who are low-income and those who are facing house identities with other sub-populations. These
insecurity. organizations have experience working with many
• Additionally, there are organizations that serve sub-populations in Boulder County and have
specific sub-populations, such as those with mental already established relationships with individuals
health or substance use disorders, people who are from those communities. BCPH can continue to
HIV positive, older adults, teen parents, and people build on collaborative efforts withthese
with intellectual or developmental disabilities. organizations.
46
4466
--- page 47 ---
Boulder County
Community Health Assessment
Capacity Assessment
Objective Six: Early intervention efforts
The information on this page describes the capacity of BCPH to meet the demands of community needs that are
relevant to Objective Six as well as the strengths and opportunities for growth within the broader behavioral health
system to meet community need related to early intervention efforts.
Current capacity within BCPH in the goals supporting this objective are:
Harm reduction (e.g., Screenings & Assessments Prosocial events (social
fentanyl test strips, support groups, youth
Narcan, needle exchange) leadership group)
2.5 /3.0 2.5 /3.0 2.2 /3.0
Capacity within BCPH to meet current community needs is sufficient in two out of three areas and moderate in the
third. Additional strengths and opportunities within the behavioral health system to support this objective are
outlined below.
Opportunity
Strength
• While the number of organizations that provide • There is an important opportunity to expand
harm reduction services is relatively small in Boulder access to harm reduction services and screening
County, the organizations that do so have high and assessments. Many organizations work with
capacity to meet the goals of their programs and individuals who use drugs and training staff and
support early intervention efforts. community members to use harm reduction and
• Additionally, these programs are collaborating with screening tools can be efficient and cost effective.
other organizations through groups like the • Additionally, there are many existing prosocial
Substance Use Advisory Group (SUAG) allowing groups that can be leveraged to expand and
information to be shared widely among substance increase access to these group support services.
use professionals and concerned community
members around the county.
47
4477
--- page 48 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
Conclusions & Next Steps
The data provided in this report was used to:
Select initial focus populations with whom to further explore
inequities and ensure adequate representation in community input
Identify an extensive initial menu of draft strategies for the 2023 –
2028 Boulder County Public Health Improvement Plan.
Key steps following the completion of this report included:
PHIP prioritization and selection of initial strategies: An OMNI-facilitated retreat
with BCPH staff and leadership to examine the strategies emerging from community
input highlighted in the qualitative data alongside the Capacity Assessment. Goals of
this session were to prioritize initial strategies utilizing the following criteria:
• Sufficient Capacity (e.g., the extent to which BCPH has or could reasonably
build, the capacity to implement activities; how well activities align with
existing BCPH services areas; community support and political will, etc.)
• High Impact (e.g., the impact activities would have on improving mental and
behavioral health in the community; how many people and which groups
would experience the greatest impact; existing evidence base, etc.)
• Addresses Current Gaps (e.g., how well activities fill service gaps in the
community, how it complements or expands existing work, etc.)
Community Open House: An OMNI-BCPH hosted event to seek extensive input from
Boulder County community members on the initial strategies; gaps in the strategies;
activities they would like to see for BCPH to focus on to improve mental and
behavioral health in Boulder County and for specific focus populations.
Additional PHIP refinements and work sessions: OMNI will facilitate a CHA/PHIP
Workgroup meeting in June, 2023 to make final refinements to the PHIP based on
community input, and to launch the development of program-level action plans.
Finalization and public release of the PHIP: The Boulder County Public Health
Improvement Plan will be finalized and released in the summer of 2023.
48
48
--- page 49 ---
BoBuoludledre Cr oCuonutnyty
CoCmommumnuitnyi tHye Haeltahl tAhs Asessssemssemnetnt
References
Bay Area Regional Health Inequities. (2020). A public health framework for reducing health inequities.
https://www.barhii.org/barhii-framework
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, January 18). The Social-Ecological Model: A Framework for
Prevention.https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/about/social-ecologicalmodel.html
Shah, U. A., Hadayia, J. M., & Forys, L. E. (2017, December). From Principles to Practice: One Local Health Department’s
Journey Toward Health Equity.Health Equity. http://doi.org/10.1089/heq.2016.0004
World Health Organization. (2010). A Conceptual Framework for Action on the Social Determinants of Health.
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241500852
49
49