Choice Enrollment

The Boulder Valley School District welcomes both students from outside our district and those who want to choose a school outside of the neighborhood school to participate in our Choice Enrollment process.

Narrow Your Search

Use the SchoolFinder to seek schools that match your child's needs and interests.

SchoolFinder Tool

Visit Schools of Interest

Every school offers Choice Enrollment events including open houses and tours

School choice events

Submit Your Application

The 
on-time
 Choice Enrollment window is from November 1, 2025 - January 7, 2026.  We'll accept applications up until August 31, 2026.

 choice enrollment application

Lottery Process

Considerations

Requested documentation

Apply

In Colorado, state law (
C.R.S. 22-36-101  Public Schools of Choice
)
 allows for children within Colorado to open enroll in any Colorado public school, even if they do not live in that school or school district's boundaries, as long as there is room available.

The Boulder Valley School District welcomes both students from outside our district and those who want to choose a school outside of their 
neighborhood school
 to participate in our Choice Enrollment process.

Selection in BVSD is based on a lottery process, not first-come first-served. 

Because Choice Enrollment is not guaranteed, district residents who choose Choice Enrollment may simultaneously pursue 
neighborhood school enrollment 
as a backup.

For more information, visit BVSD Board Policy, JECC-R - 
open enrollment procedures and information

​​​​​​Choice enrolled families of students attending a school other than their district designated household neighborhood school are responsible for the student's 
transportation.

BVSDs open enrollment process does not inquire about a child’s Individualized Education Plan (IEP) or disability status until after a child has been offered an open enrollment seat through the lottery and admitted through the completion of both the acceptance and registration steps of the process. Following this admissions step, the school of choice must review the student’s IEP to determine if the IEP can be implemented at the school of choice as a final stage of the process.  Click here for more information: 
Choice Enrollment for Students on IEPs

If the school’s review indicates that the special education program at the school is at capacity, the school will inform the family of this capacity limit  and will offer to convene an IEP meeting.  If the transfer constitutes a significant change in placement, the school will convene an IEP Team to ensure that the receiving school or program is an appropriate placement for the student.

If your child is already open enrolled, the approval is valid through the highest grade at that school.  You do 
NOT need to apply

each year to remain attending unless your household address has changed and is now out of district.

Verification of student age

Proof of Address

Proof of Age

We can accept religious, hospital or physician's certificate showing date of birth; an entry in a family bible; an adoption record; an affidavit from a parent, a birth certificate; or previously verified school records.

If you own your home, provide 
ONE
 of the following:

Signed Warranty Deed (provided at closing)

Current or last month's utility bill (i.e. gas, electric, home landline telephone, water, trash, cable or internet).  The utility bill should show parent/legal guardian's name and service address (and mailing address).  The complete bill and remittance portion still attached may be required.

If you rent/lease your home, provide 
ONE
 of the following:

Current 
signed
 lease or rental agreement that has been signed by 
all
 parties.  Landlord's contact information must be provided.

Current or last month's utility bill (i.e. gas, electric, home landline telephone, water, trash, cable or internet).  The utility bill should show parent/legal guardian's name and service address (and mailing address).  The complete bill and remittance portion still attached may be required.

If your family is living with another family, provide 
BOTH
 of the following:

Current or last month's utility bill (i.e. gas, electric, home landline telephone, water, trash, cable or internet).  The utility bill should show the 
owner/renter's name of whom your family lives with
 and service address (and mailing address).  The complete bill and remittance portion still attached may be required.

Current letter from the owner/renter of the residence with whom your family lives with stating the length of time you will be staying, the address, your names and contact information.

Ready to move forward? We can't wait for you to join the Boulder Valley School District!

Choice Enrollment will open on November 1, 2025.

Step 1

Apply

Opens November 1, 2025

You'll need:

Schools you're applying for and rank order

Required documentation (see tab)

Step 2 - Accept & Register

When you receive your seat offer, click on the link to accept the offer in your SchoolMint account.

Offers can be declined within the 10-day acceptance window.

Step 3 - Register

Then, you'll be asked to register your student.

Click the button and fill out the registration.

Honor the strict 
deadline to accept or decline the seat offer.
 If a notification of acceptance is extended, parents/guardians who wish to accept the seat have 10 calendar days from the emailed notice of acceptance to:

Indicate their acceptance in the open enrollment online system

AND, register that student to the new school of choice --

Provide any requested supporting documents to the accepted school.

BVSDs open enrollment process does not inquire about a child’s IEP or disability status until after a child has been offered an open enrollment seat through the lottery and admitted through the completion of both the acceptance and enrollment steps of the process. Following this admissions step, the school of choice must review the student’s IEP to determine if the IEP can be implemented at the school of choice as a final stage of the process.

If the school’s review indicates that the special education program at the school is at capacity, the school will inform the family of this capacity limit  and will offer to convene an IEP meeting.  If the transfer constitutes a significant change in placement, the school will convene an IEP Team to ensure that the receiving school or program is an appropriate placement for the student.

Currently enrolled BVSD students will have information updated automatically  

Unless the parent/guardian promptly accepts the offer and completes the registration, the student forfeits the seat awarded through the Open Enrollment process.

It takes approximately 48 hours to process the registration. Once completed, your child's new school will typically reach out for next steps.

Here are the important dates for the 2025-2026 enrollment period.

Choice Enrollment Lottery

Applications submitted during the first enrollment window will be given priority in the process.

Note: We accept applications from November 1, 2025, until August 31, 2026.

November 1, 2025: 
Choice Enrollment lottery window for the 2026-27 school year opens

On-time application window closing on January 7, 2026:
 Choice Enrollment lottery window for the 2026-27 school year closes

On or about January 9, 2026:
 Family notified of seat offers following Choice Enrollment lottery

Offers must be accepted and registration completed within 10 days

Post Lottery

BVSD continues to accept choice enrollment applications until August 31, 2026. Applicants are placed on wait lists and seats are offered as space is available.

January 9 - August 31, 2026

August 31, 2026:
 Choice Enrollment window closes for the 2026-27 school year

Start by reviewing the answers to the most common questions that we get.

Choice Enrollment FAQs

Can't find an answer to your question? Let us give you a hand.

Email

Call