Open Enrollment

Waitlist numbers may adjust, as siblings are accepted. Please see BVSD Board Policy JECC-R for further details.

Lottery Process

Selection is based on a lottery process, not first-come first-served.  Because Open Enrollment is not guaranteed, district residents who choose Open Enrollment may simultaneously pursue 
neighborhood school enrollment
 as a backup.

Ready to apply?

Please read the following information:

Before submitting an application, it is important for all families to be familiar with the Frequently Asked Questions section below and the 
open enrollment procedures and information
.

Honor the strict 
deadline to accept or decline the seat offer.
 If a notification of acceptance is extended, parents/guardians who wish to accept the seat have 10 calendar days from the emailed notice of acceptance to:

Indicate their acceptance
 online in the SchoolMint system

AND, then register,
 providing any supporting documents to the accepted school. 

Currently enrolled BVSD students will have information updated automatically  

Unless the parent/guardian promptly accepts the offer and completes the online registration, the student forfeits the seat awarded through the Open Enrollment process.

Open enrolled families of students attending a school other than their district designated household neighborhood school are responsible for the student's 
transportation
.

If your child is already open enrolled, the approval is valid through the highest grade at that school.  You do 
NOT need to apply

each year to remain attending unless your household address has changed and is now out of district.

BVSDs open enrollment process does not inquire about a child’s Individualized Education Plan (IEP) or disability status until after a child has been offered an open enrollment seat through the lottery and admitted through the completion of both the acceptance and registration steps of the process. Following this admissions step, the school of choice must review the student’s IEP to determine if the IEP can be implemented at the school of choice as a final stage of the process.

If the school’s review indicates that the special education program at the school is at capacity, the school will inform the family of this capacity limit  and will offer to convene an IEP meeting.  If the transfer constitutes a significant change in placement, the school will convene an IEP Team to ensure that the receiving school or program is an appropriate placement for the student.

For more information, visit BVSD Board Policy, JECC-R - 
open enrollment procedures and information

Proof of Student Age

Proof of Address

Proof of Age

We can accept religious, hospital or physician's certificate showing date of birth; an entry in a family bible; an adoption record; an affidavit from a parent, a birth certificate; or previously verified school records.

If you own your home, provide 
ONE
 of the following:

Signed Warranty Deed (provided at closing)

Current or last month's utility bill (i.e. gas, electric, home landline telephone, water, trash, cable or internet).  The utility bill MUST show parent/legal guardian's name and service address (and mailing address).  The complete bill and remittance portion still attached may be required.

If you rent/lease your home, provide 
ONE
 of the following:

Current 
signed
 lease or rental agreement that has been signed by 
all
 parties.  Landlord's contact information must be provided.

Current or last month's utility bill (i.e. gas, electric, home landline telephone, water, trash, cable or internet).  The utility bill MUST show parent/legal guardian's name and service address (and mailing address).  The complete bill and remittance portion still attached may be required.

If your family is living with another family, provide 
BOTH
 of the following:

Current or last month's utility bill (i.e. gas, electric, home landline telephone, water, trash, cable or internet).  The utility bill MUST show the 
owner/renter's name of whom your family lives with
 and service address (and mailing address).  The complete bill and remittance portion still attached may be required.

Current letter from the owner/renter of the residence with whom your family lives with stating the length of time you will be staying, the address, your names and contact information.

General questions

Important dates & applying

Preferences (on-time applicants only)

School choices

Change of address - family moves

Technical difficulties

My applicant was offered a seat to attend their requested school, now what?

What is Open Enrollment?

Open Enrollment is a process that families may use to acquire permission for their student(s) to attend a school other than their designated household neighborhood school.

Which BVSD schools do not have an attendance area and how can I enroll into one of them? 

​The following schools do not have an attendance area:  Peak to Peak K-12 Charter School, University Hill Elementary School, Community Montessori School, High Peaks Elementary School, Boulder Community School of Integrated Studies (BCSIS), Pioneer Elementary School, Horizons K-8 Charter School, Summit Middle Charter School, New Vista High School, Arapahoe Ridge High School, Nevin Platt Middle School CHOICE, and Boulder Universal Online School are charter or focus schools and do not have attendance areas.  An Open Enrollment application must be submitted to pursue enrollment into one of these schools.

What is the process for enrolling students with disabilities in charter schools?

Charter schools in the District do not discriminate on the basis of disability, and students with disabilities are welcome to apply for admission to charter schools. 
All families seeking enrollment for their student to a school of choice should complete an open enrollment application. For questions regarding the admission and enrollment of students with disabilities in charter schools, you may contact Boulder Valley School District’s Open Enrollment Office.

Is the Open Enrollment application different than Registration?

Yes.  Open Enrollment applications and the neighborhood enrollment application are two separate processes.  An Open Enrollment application is used to request a seat to a school of choice.  The neighborhood enrollment application system is used when enrolling into a BVSD school for the first time or returning after having left a BVSD school.

How many school choices can I select on the application?

One school choice is the minimum and up to three school choices is the maximum allowed to be selected for each student.

What documentation will I need when I apply?

Proof of address and documentation that verifies the student age are requested.

My family lives outside the boundaries of Boulder Valley School District, can we apply to attend through Open Enrollment?

Yes.  All families are welcome to apply for Open Enrollment.  You are not required to reside within the BVSD boundaries to apply - even if your household is in another state/country.

May I submit an application for my child for the same grade they are currently attending?

No.  Families are unable to retain or advance their students through the Open Enrollment process.  If there are concerns regarding the student's currently enrolled grade, reference the retention/advancement procedure in the 
BVSD Board Policy IKE
 for grades KG-08.

May I submit more than one application per student?

No.  Per BVSD School Board Policy, only one application per student, per school year may be submitted.  Multiple applications will be deleted without notice.  The application is designed to apply for all students in the family to apply at once and up to 3 school choices can be selected for each applicant.  Be prepared to fill out choices for all students (if interested) as you will not be allowed to go back into the application once it has been submitted.

When I complete the Open Enrollment application, which address should I use?

Families must use the household address where the student 
currently
 lives at the time of application (even if the address is out of district/state) and where they sleep the majority of the time in the case of dual households.  A proof of residence for the household address is requested for an Open Enrollment application.  For more information please see the Documentation section below.

Do I need to complete an Open Enrollment application for each student in my household that I want a choice school for?

Yes.  Our new system requires a single application for each student.  You can add each student to your new account, and then add an Open Enrollment application for each student.

How will I be notified if my child is accepted through Open Enrollment?

BVSD will send notifications via email and potentially SMS text if you opt for either or both methods to receive notification.  Only one email address is allowed per our software system and cannot be edited after the application has been submitted.  Providing a current and valid email address for contact ensures families receive communication about their application. 

Is my student’s neighborhood school’s seat being forfeited when accepting another elementary, middle, K-8 or multi-level program?

Yes.  The selected school becomes the school of attendance through the highest grade at that school.

Where can I find historical data regarding schools and open enrollment?

You may view our 
Open Enrollment Matrices
 for more information or fill out an (open records) CORA request through BVSD Communications department. 

Here is the page 
https://www.bvsd.org/departments/communications/open-records-requests

Can I submit the application before November 1?

No.  The online open enrollment application will not be available before November 1, at 8:00am.

Does it matter when I submit my application?

If you want to participate in the lottery, apply between November 1 through January 7, 2026.  Open Enrollment applications submitted 
before the deadline
 are processed through a lottery, not "first come, first served."  Any application submitted during this time will be entered into the lottery; special preference is not given to those that apply on the first day.

Any applications submitted 
after the lottery deadline 
(January 7, 2026) through August 31 will be added to the waitlist in the order we received them and no preferences are applied (such as previously attended a school, sibling attends, moved and remain) and applicants are added to any existing wait list(s) at the selected school(s)/grade based on the date/time submitted.

When and where can I submit an Open Enrollment application?

If you want to participate in the lottery for Open Enrollment, apply between November 1, through January 7.  The online application for families with students currently enrolled in BVSD is found in the website: bvsd.schoolmint.com.  Applicants who are using bvsd.schoolmint.com for the first time, need to  click on "Create an account" on that website.

I missed the January 7, 2026 deadline.  Am I still able to apply for Open Enrollment?

Yes.  If the January 7 on-time application deadline was missed, a family may submit a late Open Enrollment application and be added to the bottom of any existing wait list(s) for the school(s)/grade requested.

How can I apply if I do not have online access?

Families with limited or no online access are encouraged to use computers available for this purpose at their closest BVSD school or the Open Enrollment Office between November 1 - August 31.  The Open Enrollment application can also be accessed by many mobile telephones. 

When will I be notified of an acceptance?

Notifications of Acceptance and/or Wait list Position(s) (from the original pool of on-time applicants) will be sent on or about the mid-January via email to the email address originally entered at the beginning of the online application.

If your application is submitted after the on-time application window, your waitlist position will be visible at your bvsd.schoolmint.com account.

What if my student is placed on a wait list?

You will be able to see your wait list number at your bvsd.schoolmint.com account.

What should I do if I do not receive a notification about Open Enrollment?

Parents/guardians that have not received an email regarding acceptance/wait list positions (from the original pool of on-time applicants) to the email address submitted on the application by January 13, 2026 are responsible for checking their account at bvsd.schoolmint.com.  Please check your email's SPAM/junk folder.

*Note:  Late applicants will 
not
 automatically

receive an email listing their wait list positions.  Once the wait list positions are updated, you will be able to see your wait list number in your account bvsd.schoolmint.com

Are preferences given to on-time open enrollment applicants AND late applicants?

No.  Preferences can only be applied to on-time applicants that submit their open enrollment applications between the November - January dates listed in the Important Dates section above.  Late applicants cannot receive any preferences listed below.

General Preferences:

The lottery shall incorporate preferences as follows:

BVSD students wishing to return from a choice school to their designated neighborhood school for the next school year.

In-district students who move out of their designated neighborhood school attendance area but who remain in the School District and wish to remain at the school the student is currently attending.

Sibling/Household preferences:

 a. A new student, whether they reside inside or outside of the district, whose sibling/household member has been in attendance and will be attending the requested school the following year.

 b. A sibling/household member of a student accepting placement during the same open enrollment period.

 Note: When multiple siblings/household members apply for open enrollment at the same school and in choice order, they will be linked as siblings/household members in the lottery process.

A student of an eligible employee, whether they reside inside or outside of the district. Eligible employees must be working for BVSD at the time of the application and on the first day of the applicable school year.

 Note: If there is an enrollment opening at the time of employment, an employee’s children may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space available, the employee’s enrollment preference will be applied in the following school year or the next available space.

Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.

Current students who move outside the boundaries of BVSD and wish to remain for a future school year in the BVSD school the student is currently attending.

Students of individuals who reside outside of but work within the boundaries of the Boulder Valley School District, including in Boulder, Broomfield, and Gilpin counties. Eligible individuals must be working within the boundaries of BVSD at the time of the application and on the first day of the applicable school year.

Students who reside outside the boundaries of BVSD and are not currently attending a BVSD school.

I am a current BVSD employee, does my applicant receive an employee preference to attend BVSD charter schools? 

​No.  Parents/guardians of the applicant must be employed 
at the charter school
 of interest at the time of the open enrollment application to receive the employee preference.  See the specific charter school's preference section on this website for more details.

I am a current employee at one of BVSD's charter schools, does my applicant receive an employee preference when applying to other schools in BVSD?

No.  Applicants only receive an employee preference to the charter school where their parent/guardian is currently working at the time of the open enrollment application.  

Do students who have special needs or are gifted receive preference in the open enrollment process? 

No.  Seat offers are based on space availability at the requested school(s)/grade.  Students are selected by random lottery without special consideration for needs or ability.  Once an offer is made to the applicant, the seat is held until an IEP review is completed by the school.

Does my applicant receive preference in their current school's feeder system?  For example, after open enrolling/attending to Louisville Elementary School, I would like my applicant to now attend to Louisville Middle School.

No.  Students do not receive preference for open enrollment to the next feeder school.

*Note:  After completing elementary or middle levels, students are automatically enrolled to their household's designated neighborhood school at the next level unless they are accepted via open enrollment to an alternate middle or high school.  BVSD enrollments for students living out of district will end at the end of the school year at the current level unless they are accepted via open enrollment back into a BVSD school at the next level.

Peak to Peak K-12 Charter School Preferences: 

Notwithstanding anything in BVSD Policy JECC or JECC-R to the contrary, applicants to Peak to Peak schools are given preference as follows:

Current students enrolled at Peak to Peak.

Sibling/Household preferences:

A new student, whether they reside inside or outside of the district, whose sibling/household member has been in attendance and will be attending Peak to Peak the following year.

A sibling/household member of a student accepting placement at Peak to Peak during the same open enrollment period.

Note: When multiple siblings/household members apply for open enrollment at the same school and in choice order, they will be linked as siblings/household members in the lottery process.

A student of an eligible Peak to Peak employee, whether they reside inside or outside of the district. Eligible employees must be working for Peak to Peak at the time of the application and on the first day of the applicable school year.

Note: If there is an enrollment opening at the time of employment, an employee’s children may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space available, the employee’s enrollment preference will be applied in the following school year or the next available space.

Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.

Students who reside outside the boundaries of BVSD and are not currently attending a BVSD school.

The number of students admitted via a preference as children of staff shall not exceed 20% of enrollment. 

Once enrolled in Peak to Peak, the school becomes the “school of attendance” for each succeeding year unless a student’s parents or legal guardian go through the open enrollment process and enroll in another school.  

The school district will notify students of their acceptance into Peak to Peak and confirm the students’ acceptance into the school.

Horizons K‐8 Charter:

Children of Faculty (licensed, non‐temporary employee) employed in a licensed Faculty position of 0.25 F.T.E. or greater, whether they reside inside or outside the BVSD boundaries.

Sibling of a student who is attending and will be attending Horizons the following year.

‐EQUAL preference with –

Children of Faculty employed in a licensed temporary full‐time, temporary part‐time or temporary job‐share Faculty position, with a one year contract of 0.25 F.T.E or greater (whether they reside inside or outside the BVSD boundaries).

Sibling of a student who is assigned in the current year.

Children of non‐licensed Staff in their 2
nd
 consecutive year, or subsequent, of employment at 25% or greater (i.e., 10+ hours/week), whether they reside inside or outside the BVSD boundaries.

Family Income Preference: In-district applicants who submit an optional current year Family Economic Data Survey as part of their online open enrollment application and qualify as low-income, until 25% of the total open enrollment slots are filled with low-income students.

Other community preferences as already stated in BVSD Policy JECC‐R.

NOTE:
 If there is an enrollment opening at the time of employment, licensed employee’s children may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space available, employee will wait until the following school year or the next available space.

Summit Charter Middle School Preferences:

Children of school organizers and of present and former Directors.

Children of Summit current teachers and staff residing in or out of District.

In District siblings of currently enrolled students and Summit graduates (completed 8th grade at Summit), including those accepted in the current lottery.

Family Income – This preference applies to in‐district applicants for 6th grade who submit an optional current year economic survey as part of their online open enrollment application and qualify as low‐income, until 10% of the qualifying entering 6th grade students are enrolled.

In District with prior application (a student who was placed on the waitlist and declined an opportunity to enroll at Summit is not eligible for this priority).

Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.

Out of District sibling of current Summit student or a former Summit graduate.

Out of district students.

Are there any special requirements if I am applying to University Hill Elementary School or Pioneer Elementary School? 

Yes.  Native English speaking students in grades 1st through 5th should have an educational background in a bilingual program and will be assessed by the school to determine program appropriateness prior to final acceptance.  Detailed instructions on how to complete the assessment are outlined in the Notification of Acceptance once an applicant is offered a seat.

Does it matter in what order I select my schools? 

Yes.  All higher choice (on-time) applicants will receive an offer before lower choice applicants at the requested school(s)/grade, regardless of preference.  For example, all 1st choice applicants are offered a seat before 2nd choice applicants are offered a seat and so on.

Does selecting only one school increase chances of acceptance in open enrollment? 

No.  Selecting one school does NOT increase or reduce chances of being accepted to the requested school.

If my applicant receives a Notification of Acceptance for a lower school choice, will they still be considered for higher choices, including the first school choice?

Yes, regardless of whether you accept or decline a lower school choice,  your student will still be considered for any higher choices as space becomes available during the wait list period (through the first day of school or September if charter school). 

If your applicant prefers to be removed from the higher school's waitlist(s), you may request that applicant be removed by emailing the request to 
enrollment.helpdesk@bvsd.org
 so no further offers can be made. 

Is it possible to be considered for a lower choice once my applicant has been offered their first choice school?

No.  Once an applicant has been offered their first choice school anytime during the open enrollment process, even if the offer is declined, the applicant is not considered for lower choices in the open enrollment process and will receive no further offers.

Is it possible to add more school choices to my application once it has been submitted?

No.  Applications are final once they have been submitted to better serve our large volume of applicants.  Applicants may not edit their applications after submitting them as they will be locked.  We ask that you be sure of your school choices before submitting.  

Alternatively, applicants may send a request to add/change school choices to 
enrollment.helpdesk@bvsd.org
.  Our department staff may make manual changes to your school choices 
in some cases
 with the exception that our software requires all school choice waitlist positions must be reset to the requested date of the change as if the application was submitted on the date of the request.  For example, if your applicant's waitlist position was #5 at the requested school/grade on the original date of application submission, the applicant's new waitlist position will be moved to today's date (if requested today), and the prior waitlist position is lost at all requested schools.

Common Scenarios:  Moved within district boundaries and wish to remain enrolled

Scenario
:  My children have attended our neighborhood school(s) in the city of Boulder schools for years, but we recently moved to the city of Louisville and I would like for them to continue attending their current schools where they are comfortable, what can I do?

Action
:  Families may complete an on-time Open Enrollment application and provide their new in-district proof of address (see the Documentation below for a list of acceptable proof).  The student will receive one of the higher preferences to remain attending their current school.  Acceptance is not guaranteed.  A seat must be available at that school/grade for your student to receive an offer.  If there are families that have also moved within district boundaries and would also like to remain enrolled at the current school (such as your family), then they too will share this preference and would be in competition for a seat.   *Late applicants cannot receive this preference, see Preferences section above.

Common Scenarios:  Moved out of district boundaries and wish to remain enrolled

Scenario
:  My child has been enrolled in BVSD for years but we recently moved to a new home outside of BVSD boundaries.  I would like my student to remain enrolled at their current school, what can I do?

Action
:  When families move to another Colorado school district, the student would be enrolled in the new district belonging to their new address.  However, families may submit on-time Open Enrollment applications to remain enrolled at their current BVSD school of attendance.  There is a preference given to applicants that have moved out of district, however, it is lower than that of students that reside within BVSD boundaries.  Given that there are enough seats available, the student may receive a seat offer.  *Late applicants cannot receive this preference, see Preferences section above.

My family's household will be moving in the future, can I apply for open enrollment now if I wish to have my child remain attending their current school?

No.  Families cannot apply to remain at their current school until the move (out of neighborhood boundaries and/or out of district boundaries) has taken place.  The open enrollment application is based on the current household address of the student 
at the time of application
.

I have already submitted an open enrollment application for one of my children, now I need to submit one for my other children but the application will not allow me to go back into my first application?

Applications are created separately for each child in SchoolMint.  Access your account, ensure you have created your additional student and start another Open Enrollment application for your next student.  Add students and applications as needed for your household.

If all of the students in my household attend BVSD schools and all are added to my SchoolMint account, but I only want to open enroll one student , do I need to fill something out for the rest of the students in my household?

No.  Adding students to your SchoolMint account does not mean you have to also Open Enroll them to a school of choice.

**NOTE: An application is 
not complete
 until you sign and complete the application .  A confirmation email is automatically emailed to the email address or texted to the phone number entered on the application.**

My household is within BVSD boundaries but the application says my address is "out of district".  How can I fix this?

Our system needs to see each address exactly as it asks for it in order for it to be recognized and assign schools.  The new system is based on Google Maps technology.  If you see an inconsistency, please let us know: 
enrollment.helpdesk@bvsd.org
.

If all of the above is correct and you have not entered extra spaces, symbols or numbers then your address may be new to our software and will therefore not recognize it.  The default language it will display will be "out of district" if it is not recognized.  Our department examines each individual application before processing and the address section is top priority.  Our team will "fix" your address for you before it goes on to the next step.

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

How do I accept the seat offer?

Current BVSD student applicants (presently attends a 
BVSD school
):

Go back to your SchoolMint account and select Yes you accept the school.  We will transfer your student to their new school of choice.

New or returning BVSD student applicants (does 

not
 presently attend a BVSD school):

Parents/Guardians must complete the Enrollment application in SchoolMint to enroll.  Please refer to your Notification of Acceptance for more information.  
The student cannot be enrolled until this process is complete.

If my student received a Notification of Acceptance and I no longer want the seat, what steps do I need to take to decline?

Parents/guardians can decline their offer in their SchoolMint account within 10 days (or what deadline the notification states) of emailed notice.  The student will remain at their current school of attendance.

What happens if I do not respond to my offer on time?

If you do not return to the SchoolMint application within 10 days of the offer and answer with a Yes or No, BVSD will treat no answer as a decline to the seat per revised board policy JECC-R.  No appeals can be made after the deadline.

Will an enrollment transfer be completed if I received a Notification of Acceptance for New Vista High School and/or Arapahoe Ridge High School? 

You must call New Vista High School or Arapahoe Ridge High School as instructed on the offer to schedule a family interview with a staff member.

Do I need to fill out an open enrollment application every year for my child?

No.  The approval is valid through the highest grade at the selected school (8th grade if K-8, etc.) 
unless
 you move outside of district boundaries.  

I received a Notification of Acceptance and I want to defer it, can I can do that?

Open enrollment does not defer seat offers into a different year. If you are not planning on your child attending the school of choice beginning the immediate Fall, please decline the seat.

If my applicant received a Notification of Acceptance for a lower school choice, will they still be considered for higher choices, including the first school choice?

Yes, regardless of whether you accept or decline a lower school choice,  your student will still be considered for any higher choices as space becomes available during the wait list period (through the first day of school or September if charter school). 

If your applicant prefers to be removed from the higher school's waitlist(s), you may request that applicant be removed by emailing the request to open.enrollment@bvsd.org so no further offers can be made. 

Students can also...

Attend their district designated neighborhood school (based on household address).

Open enroll to another neighborhood school.

Open enroll to a focus school (meets BVSD standards but may have a different curriculum or philosophy).

Open enroll to a charter school (an independent school) within the district.

Selection is based on a 
lottery 
process, not first-come first-served.  Because Open Enrollment is not guaranteed, district residents who choose Open Enrollment may simultaneously pursue 
neighborhood school enrollment
 as a backup.

Visiting District Schools

Each Winter season, BVSD schools host open houses and tours so that you may visit and evaluate the schools of interest.

View school selection events

School wait lists

You can check your waitlist number inside your open enrollment account:  
bvsd.schoolmint.com

Note: We process applications proactively during Spring and Summer.