Loading Languages

May 2026

Community members came together at six engagement sessions to learn more about the enrollment challenges the district is facing, discuss the actions being considered, and share their perspectives about what matters most to them. 

Get an inside look at the meetings

Thank you for sharing your voice

Thank you to the many parents, staff and community members who participated in our six Connect with BVSD: Resilient Schools Community Engagement Sessions in April.

The most meaningful part was seeing participants coming together to discuss their values, priorities and other considerations for BVSD’s solutions to address declining enrollment.

It is not too late to participate
BVSD sent the Resilient Schools Community Survey to staff on April 21 and families on April 28, giving everyone an opportunity to participate. 

While the survey does not provide the same opportunity for learning and dialogue as the in-person sessions, it gives everyone a chance to share their values and priorities before we conclude this phase of engagement.

The final day to complete the survey is Sunday, May 17.

The survey link sent via email is unique and may only be used once. If you have not already completed the survey, another reminder and unique link will be sent on May 15.

All survey results and feedback from the sessions will be presented to the Board of Education during a report scheduled for Tuesday, June 9.

Rob Anderson
Superintendent
Boulder Valley School District

Nicole Rajpal
President, Board of Education
Boulder Valley School District

In this issue: 

Learn More: FAQs, Engagement sessions slide deck, Broomfield City Council, Let's Talk livestream archive
Community Engagement: Timeline & Status
LEARN MORE
Answers to what you are wondering

We have heard many thoughtful and curious questions during the engagement process. Responses to the most common questions are posted at the link below. This page will be updated as we move forward in the coming months. 

Declining Enrollment Frequently Asked Questions

Community Engagement Session Materials

If you missed the engagement sessions, or want to review the information that was shared, the slide deck is available at the link below. 

Resilient Schools Slide Deck

Connecting with our municipal partners

BVSD's community engagement efforts include connecting with the cities that make up our district to talk about how changing demographics in the area are affecting the schools that are at the heart of our communities. This month, staff will present to the City and County of Broomfield on May 12. 

Watch the Broomfield City Council meeting 

Let's Talk: Livestream information session with BVSD leaders

Recently through a series of livestream broadcasts, BVSD leaders discussed the challenges of declining enrollment, its impacts on students and teachers, and potential district actions. They also answered questions from our BVSD community. Check out the discussions below. 
Session I
The challenge of declining enrollment

Watch the discussion

Session II
The impact on our students and teachers

Watch the discussion

Session III
The options and next steps

Watch the discussion

Community Engagement: Timeline & Status

Community Engagement & Decision Making Timeline

What is happening now

MAY
Community survey

JUNE

Community engagement summary presentation to the Board, June 9

For more information and resources visit our 
Resilient Schools website
. 

Boulder Valley School District
Unsubscribe Link

Unsubscribe Link
