Loading Languages

March 2026

JUST ANNOUNCED!

Dates for regional engagement sessions and 
other ways to connect with us on this important topic. 

LEARN MORE HERE

Let’s have the courage to imagine an even better school district

Dear BVSD Families and Staff,

As you know, we are currently engaged in important planning for the future of Boulder Valley School District to respond to the pressures of declining enrollment. 

Before developing formal proposals for our schools, we are engaging our community. We are asking families, staff, and community members to share their values and priorities. 

Naturally, these conversations are sparking concerns for the future of individual schools. That reaction is understandable. Schools are deeply personal. They represent memories, relationships, and identity.

But if we focus only on preserving what exists today, we risk missing the opportunity to design something even stronger for tomorrow. 

Let us approach this moment thoughtfully, honestly, and courageously . . . 

Read the full letter from Superintendent Anderson and Board President Rajpal

Rob Anderson
Superintendent
Boulder Valley School District
Nicole Rajpal
President
Board of Education
Boulder Valley School District

In this issue: 

What we are hearing at our elementary roundtables
How declining enrollment shows up in the student experience: One teacher's perspective 
Update on our outreach to local municipalities

Community Engagement: How you can participate
Community Engagement: Timeline & Status
Recent News: Latest enrollment data confirms need for holistic action

Listening First - What we are hearing from our community so far

Teachers and staff share their hopes and concerns

Knowing that our educators are central to the student experience, we have been working to connect with the staff at every elementary school. Not surprisingly, what we know to be true has been confirmed—our people are our strength. It is our wonderful staff that make our schools the incredible places they are and create amazing learning experiences for students.

Read on to see what our educators are telling us

How declining enrollment shows up in the student experience: One teacher's perspective

As a teacher in BVSD, I understand why smaller school sizes can sound appealing. Individual attention, close-knit communities, and familiarity are all positives. However, what often gets lost in the conversation is that very small schools come with significant challenges that directly affect the quality and consistency of education students receive. 

Read one teacher's perspective about what declining enrollment can mean for students

BVSD's community engagement efforts include connecting with the cities that make up our district to talk about how changing demographics in the area are affecting the schools that are at the heart of our communities. In February, staff presented to the city councils in Superior and Louisville. Future presentations and meetings are planned with the City of Boulder and the City Manager of the City and County of Broomfield. 

Town of Superior
February 23, 2026

Watch the meeting video

City of Louisville
February 24, 2026

Watch the meeting video

Community Engagement: How you can participate
Let's Talk: Livestream information session with BVSD leaders

Following Spring Break, we will launch a special declining enrollment series of Let's Talk Education livestreams. BVSD leaders will explain the challenges of declining enrollment, its impacts, district actions, and the decision timeline. These sessions will be livestreamed on 
BV22
 and 
BVSD's YouTube channel
. 

Session I
The challenge of declining enrollment
Session II
The impact on our schools
Session III
The options and next steps

SUBMIT QUESTIONS

Mark your calendars to attend a community engagement session

Join us for one of six upcoming Community Engagement Sessions focused on the challenges of declining enrollment in BVSD.

Learn how these changes are beginning to impact our classrooms, ask questions, and share your priorities and values. Your input will help inform the decisions the Board of Education will make this fall.

WEEK 1
April 13 (Monday)

New Vista High School
700 20th St., Boulder
6:30 - 8:30 p.m.
April 15 (Wednesday)
BVSD Education Center
6500 Arapahoe Rd., Bldr
10:30 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.
April 16 (Thursday)
Boulder High School
1604 Arapahoe Rd., Bldr
6:30 - 8:30 p.m.

April 18 (Saturday)
BVSD Education Center
6500 Arapahoe Rd., Bldr
9:30 - 11:30 a.m.

WEEK 2

April 20 (Monday)
Broomfield High School
1 Eagle Way, Broomfield
6:30 - 8:30 p.m.
April 22 (Wednesday)
Monarch High School
329 Campus Dr., Lsvlle
6:30 - 8:30 p.m. 

RSVP Here

Community Engagement: Timeline & Status

Community Engagement & Decision Making Timeline

What is happening now

MARCH

Roundtable discussions with elementary principals and teachers
Informational meetings with district advisory committees

Informational meetings with municipalities
Let's Talk: Livestream talk show with BVSD leaders
APRIL

Regional community meetings (See schedule 
above
)

TAKING A REGIONAL APPROACH

Declining enrollment in BVSD is being felt in several geographic areas: Boulder, Louisville & Superior, and Broomfield. Our community engagement efforts to date have included teacher and staff roundtable conversations at elementary schools and presentations to city councils. 
Click on the map
 to see where we've been so far. 

Recent News About Enrollment in BVSD
Latest enrollment data confirms need for holistic action

Aligning with the overall district enrollment projections, school specific projections show enrollment dropping in most elementary schools over the next five years, according to the Annual Enrollment Trend report which was 
presented to the Board in February
. 

By 2030, BVSD is projected to have 14 elementary schools at two classes per grade level or below, with two schools projected to be just above two classes per grade level. Of those schools, seven are projected to be at 1.5 classes per grade level or below. As enrollment drops, resources also dwindle, impacting staffing and our ability to provide robust learning opportunities and student supports. 

Read more about the latest enrollment data report

For more information and resources visit our 
Reslient Schools website
. 

Boulder Valley School District
Unsubscribe Link

Unsubscribe Link
