Loading Languages

April 2026

Plan to Attend!

Community Engagement Sessions start next week. This is your opportunity to provide valuable feedback about how BVSD responds to the challenges of declining enrollment. 

LEARN MORE HERE

Why we are approaching engagement differently this time

Dear BVSD Families and Staff,

Beginning next week, we will welcome students, parents, employees and community members to engagement sessions as we look to make our schools resilient in a time of declining enrollment. 

It is crucially important that we hear from our community regarding their values and priorities before we make decisions regarding the future of our schools.

This is markedly different from what happened at the Boulder Valley School District about 20 years ago. Facing a similar decline in enrollment, the decision was made to close a number of schools, and then the district engaged the community.

This time we are approaching engagement differently. We are committed to listen to as many voices as possible before decisions are made.

Read the full letter from Board President Rajpal and Superintendent Rob Anderson

Rob Anderson
Superintendent
Boulder Valley School District
Nicole Rajpal
President
Board of Education
Boulder Valley School District

In this issue: 

What to expect at the community engagement sessions
Op Ed from the District Accountability Committee 
In case you missed it: Catch up on recent discussions

Community Engagement: Timeline & Status

Listening First - Share your perspective 

What to expect at the community engagement sessions

Community engagement sessions start next week and BVSD elementary and PK-8 families are encouraged to attend. This is your opportunity to learn more about the complexities of how declining enrollment—and the associated reduction in funding—is showing up in our schools, help us understand your values and priorities and provide your thoughts about the options BVSD is considering. 

Read on learn more

We are BVSD parents: Here are our ideas on school consolidation and civic engagement 

This month, we have the opportunity to attend a 
series of meetings to discuss declining enrollment
 and the financial pressures facing our schools. Most importantly, we’ll get to share 
our 
ideas for what we can do about it. 

Read the full Op Ed from the District Accountability Committee that appeared in the Daily Camera Apr. 8, 2026

Watch for another way to provide input later this month

If you can’t make it to one of the engagement sessions, you’ll have another opportunity to provide input. 

Later this month, all Boulder Valley School District staff and families will be invited to participate in the "Resilient Schools Community Survey." Similar to the engagement sessions, this short survey aims to give our community the opportunity to tell us what matters most as we plan for the future of our school district and strive to maintain the high-quality learning experiences students currently receive. 

Keep an eye on your inbox/text messages for a link to the survey.

IN CASE YOU MISSED IT - Catch up on recent conversations

Let's Talk: Livestream information session with BVSD leaders
Over the past few weeks, BVSD leaders have discussed the challenges of declining enrollment, its impacts on students and teachers, and potential district actions. They've also answered questions from our BVSD community. Check out the discussion below. 

Session I
The challenge of declining enrollment

Watch the discussion

Session II
The impact on our students and teachers

Watch the discussion

Session III
The options and next steps

Watch the discussion

Connecting with our municiple partners

BVSD's community engagement efforts include connecting with the cities that make up our district to talk about how changing demographics in the area are affecting the schools that are at the heart of our communities. Last month, staff presented to the City of Boulder. Up next: the City and County of Broomfield on May 12. 

Watch the Boulder City Council meeting 

Community Engagement: Timeline & Status

Community Engagement & Decision Making Timeline

What is happening now
APRIL
Regional community meetings (Learn more 
here
)

April 13 | 
New Vista High School, 6:30-9 p.m.
April 15 | 
BVSD Education Center, 10:30 a.m. - 1 p.m.
April 16 | 
Boulder High School, 6:30-9 p.m.

April 18 | 
BVSD Education Center, 9:30 a.m. - noon
April 20 | 
Broomfield High School, 6:30-9 p.m.

April 22 | 
Monarch High School, 6:30-9 p.m.
MAY

Community polling

For more information and resources visit our 
Resilient Schools website
. 

Boulder Valley School District
Unsubscribe Link

Unsubscribe Link
