Loading Languages

August 2026

Resilient Schools proposal presented to Board August 25

This has not been a restful summer for the team here at BVSD.

Our leadership team has worked diligently to evaluate options involving potential school consolidations, closures and reconfigurations. They have analyzed enrollment trends, building capacity, facility conditions and long-term student needs. They weighed the potential challenges of many possibilities and constructively questioned their own thinking.

Now, our team is preparing to present our proposal, reasoning, and next steps of the process to the Board of Education on August 25. We hope you attend or watch. 

As we've shared throughout this process, our goal is to create a more resilient school district that continues to provide an exceptional educational experience despite declining enrollment.

We knew from the beginning there would be no perfect solution. Every option comes with tough challenges, and this work has been every bit as difficult as we expected.

Our team has remained mindful that every proposed change affects students, families and staff members. Those individuals have been at the center of every conversation and every decision.

Every BVSD school is extraordinary because of the people who learn and work there. While buildings are important, our responsibility is to ensure that every student has access to the strongest possible educational experience. Addressing declining enrollment now will help preserve the high-quality instruction, programs and opportunities our students deserve for years to come.

No matter what lies ahead, our commitment remains the same: to work together, support one another and ensure that every student, family and staff member is cared for throughout this transition. They are, and always will be, what matters most.

Read the letter online

Rob Anderson
Superintendent
Boulder Valley School District

Nicole Rajpal
President
Board of Education
Boulder Valley School District

In this issue: 

Proposal Development
Understanding the Challenge
Timeline

Proposal Development

Developing the Board of Education proposal for school adjustments

Next week, the Board of Education will have its first opportunity to consider and discuss specific school adjustments aimed at making our school district more resilient in this time of declining enrollment. The proposed changes will include school closures, consolidations, and reconfigurations. 
The worksession will be held Aug. 25 at 3 p.m. at the Education Center 
and will be broadcast on BVSD’s Education Access station, 
BV22
 (Comcast Channel 22) or 
online
 and simulcast on the 
BVSD Board YouTube channel
.

Read on to learn more

Click the image to get an inside look at the community engagement sessions. 
Before developing a proposal, we listened to our community 

Closing schools is one of the most difficult tasks a school district can face. We knew it was vitally important to connect with our community to understand their perspectives and priorities before developing specfic changes for the Board to consider. Consistent themes emerged from our 
extensive community engagement effort
 last spring: 
Smaller class sizes
Fewer multi-age classes
More time for non-classroom educators and other school professionals to be in schools to support kids

Read more about what we learned from our community

Understanding the options

The Board has identified several different types of adjustments that could be made to schools to respond to declining enrollment and use resources more efficiently. These include introducing, expanding or relocating focus programs; reconfiguring grades between a pair of schools; consolidating two schools into one building and closing one or more schools and redistributing students. 

This 
video
 provides the details.

Understanding the Challenge
Learn about what is happening with enrollment in BVSD 
and why it matters in this video. 

Let's Talk: Livestream information session with BVSD leaders

This spring, BVSD leaders discussed the challenges of declining enrollment, its impacts on students and teachers, and potential district actions. They also answered questions from our BVSD community. Check out the discussions below. 

Session I
The challenge of declining enrollment

Watch the discussion

Session II
The impact on our students and teachers

Watch the discussion

Session III
The options and next steps

Watch the discussion

How declining enrollment shows up in the student experience: One teacher's perspective

As a teacher in BVSD, I understand why smaller school sizes can sound appealing. Individual attention, close-knit communities, and familiarity are all positives. However, what often gets lost in the conversation is that very small schools come with significant challenges that directly affect the quality and consistency of education students receive. 

Read one teacher's perspective about what declining enrollment can mean for students

Enrollment drops more than expected, Board expresses desire to take action to respond

BVSD’s overall enrollment continued to decline last year, but at a greater rate than expected, BVSD Senior Planner Glen Segrue told the Board in an update in December. The student count dropped 525 students, or 1.9% from last year—1% more than projected. Over the past five years, the downward trend is less steep at 1.3%. This is BVSD’s second biggest drop in enrollment since the pandemic. The district’s enrollment has declined by nearly 3,600 students since 2015.

Read on to learn more
Board Decision Milestones

Overall Community Engagement & Decision Making Timeline

For more information and resources visit our 
Resilient Schools website
. 

Boulder Valley School District
Unsubscribe Link

Unsubscribe Link
