Loading Languages

Our promise as we begin this difficult journey

Dear BVSD Families and Staff,

We are entering a challenging but important period of planning for the future of the Boulder Valley School District, which includes consolidation, closure, or programmatic changes at the elementary level. We want to begin by sharing our commitment to you and to our community.

Despite our best efforts, the latest projections show that enrollment in the Boulder Valley School District will continue to decline into the foreseeable future. In five years, we project having 1,700 fewer students than we have today, for a total decline of over 5,000 students since 2017. Because school funding is directly tied to enrollment, this shift is already having a significant impact on our budget and our ability to sustain the learning, support and programs our families expect and rely on.

We are proud that BVSD students continue to thrive. Thanks to the extraordinary work of our educators and staff, our schools are performing at high levels across many measures, including increasing graduation rates, state growth scores and the number of students earning college credit, while in high school. Yet we are increasingly stretching our limited resources across a growing number of shrinking schools. The inequities that have begun to emerge today, will only grow moving forward, creating more and more inequities in programming, staffing, and opportunities for students in the future.

To preserve the high-quality educational experience our students deserve—and to ensure equity across all schools—we must begin planning for thoughtful, systemwide adjustments. 

This will be difficult work. Every school in BVSD is deeply valued by its staff, students, and families, and we do not take the potential impact of future decisions lightly.

At this stage, no decisions have been made. Our focus now is on listening, learning, and engaging our community before a plan is developed. 

Because our educators are central to the student experience, we have begun by meeting with elementary principals and teachers to better understand the challenges they are seeing and the conditions students need to thrive. 

Following Spring Break, we will begin broader, regional engagement with families and community members.

In the coming weeks and months, we will also share clear information about enrollment trends, funding realities, and the choices ahead.
Our commitments to you during this process

You can count on us to:
Be transparent and honest about the challenges we face
Communicate regularly and clearly
Seek input on values, priorities, and tradeoffs

Use the feedback gathered through our community engagement sessions to inform options and Board decision-making
All together for all students… to create resilient schools

We believe deeply in this community and in our shared commitment to students. 

We will work collaboratively to find solutions that strengthen our system, support our staff, and provide the best possible experience for every student.

You will see regular updates in this new monthly BVSD Enrollment Impacts Newsletter, and we will share details soon about regional engagement sessions and additional opportunities for input.

Thank you for your partnership, your care for our schools, and your commitment to all BVSD students.
Rob Anderson
Superintendent
Boulder Valley School District
Nicole Rajpal
President
Board of Education
Boulder Valley School District

Watch the video explaining BVSD's Declining Enrollment Impacts

Community Engagement Plan & Timeline

BVSD announces timeline for engagement and action in light of continued declining enrollment

Facing accelerating enrollment decline and the associated reduction of funding, the Board of Education has determined that more substantial action is needed to allow BVSD to use resources more efficiently in order to maintain the high-quality learning experiences students currently receive. 

Before developing specific options, BVSD wants to share information and collect feedback from BVSD stakeholders. Initial meetings with principals and teachers are underway. Regional community meetings will be planned for March through May, with a summary of feedback presented to the Board in June. Staff will develop school adjustment options over the summer and present those to the Board in August. Final Board action on the proposed options is planned for October, with the possibility of changes being put in place for the 2027-28 school year. 

Learn more about the engagement plan on our website.

Community Engagement Timeline
What is happening now

FEBRUARY & MARCH

Roundtable discussions with elementary principals and teachers

Informational meetings with district advisory committees
Informational meetings with municipalities
MARCH - MAY

Regional community meetings (More information coming soon)

Recent News About Enrollment in BVSD

Enrollment drops more than expected, Board expresses desire to take action to respond

BVSD’s overall enrollment continued to decline this year, but at a greater rate than expected, BVSD Senior Planner Glen Segrue told the Board in an update earlier this month. The student count dropped 525 students, or 1.9% from last year—1% more than projected. Over the past five years, the downward trend is less steep at 1.3%. This is BVSD’s second biggest drop in enrollment since the pandemic. The district’s enrollment has declined by nearly 3,600 students since 2015.

Learn more about the latest enrollment data on our website.

TUNE IN: 
Annual Trend Report Update to Board of Education, Feb. 10, 5 p.m.

Resources
Declining Enrollment website

Enrollment Data dashboard
Long Range Advisory Committee website
Board meetings
Jan. 27, 2026

Dec. 9, 2025
Oct. 21, 2025

Boulder Valley School District
Unsubscribe Link

Unsubscribe Link
