Mesa Elementary School Transportation Resources - Boulder Valley School District

Search

Clear

Search

MyBVSD Login

Mesa Elementary School Transportation Resources 

Welcome to the Mesa Elementary School Transportation Resource page, where you will find information on all of the ways to get to school. Check out the travel map below to discover:

Comfortable walking paths, highlighted in green.

High congestion areas to avoid, highlighted in red.

Ideas for locations to do a park and walk, highlighted in yellow.

Take the 3 Block Challenge and get a short walk in before school! 

Questions? Email SafeRoutes@bvsd.org 

Walk or Bicycle to School

School Bus

RTD Zero Fare for Youth

Carpool

Park and Walk - Take the 3 Block Challenge

Trip Tracker Rewards Program

Walking and Bicycling Infrastructure:

An extensive network of biking and walking paths leads to campus. Crosswalks on Lehigh have been recently upgraded. Enjoy the new path through Bear Creek Park!

Click here for tips on walking to school.

Click here for tips on biking to school
.

E-bikes
 are gaining in popularity. Visit our E-Bike Safety page to learn some tips on riding an e-bike: 
https://www.bvsd.org/departments/transportation/bvsd-safe-routes-to-school/e-bike-safety

Bike Parking:

There is a large bike parking lot on the south and east sides of the school. 

Who is eligible for bus service?

Students who live in the school attendance area and outside of the walk boundary:

Elementary (grades K-5): 1.5 miles

Middle School (grades 6-8): 2 miles

High School (grades 9-12): 2.5 miles

Students with special needs who have a transportation clause in their IEP

McKinney-Vento program

Space Available Application:

Students who are not eligible for the bus may apply, starting in August, 
on Infinite Campus 
for a Space Available seat on the bus. The Space Available program provides an opportunity for students who are not transportation-eligible to apply for a seat on a school bus, if there is available capacity. Space Available applications will be processed on a first-come, first-served basis. Applying for a seat on the bus via the Space Available program does not guarantee a seat on the bus. Please note, no new bus stops will be created for the Space Available program. Existing bus stops must be utilized.

RTD is excited to welcome a future generation of transit users to experience all the benefits at no cost.

Zero Fare for Youth
 is a program aimed at enhancing the lives of RTD customers and communities by reducing transportation costs for families and individuals. By inviting youth ages 19 and under to ride buses and trains at no cost, we also are able to remove barriers to education and employment. If you’re new to our system, check out our 
How to Ride video.

Use the 
RTD Trip Planner
 to make plans to get to your destination.

Use the Next Ride app to track bus locations in real-time

*What Do I Need to Show When I Ride?

To ride at no cost as part of this program, you must be prepared to show one of the following to the bus operator or fare inspector: current school ID, valid government-issued ID, alien registration/permanent resident card, Military ID/dependent card with DOB, RTD-issued youth special discount card.

To request a RTD-issued youth special discount card please contact us at 
specialdiscount@rtd-denver.com

If you have more questions, go to 
rtd-denver.com
 or call RTD at 303-299-6000.

RTD to Mesa

Skip Schedule and Map

If you need help getting your children to and from school, a carpool might be a good option. BVSD has partnered with the Denver Regional Council of Governments (DRCOG) to utilize their SchoolPool tool that helps match families, by school, to organize a carpool.

All BVSD schools have their own 
SchoolPool
 carpool network. 
Invitations to join your school's network will be sent in August for the upcoming school year. 

This secure matching system will connect you with families in your neighborhood to share the responsibilities of going to school and back by carpooling, walking, biking or riding either RTD or the school bus together. 

For questions or to request your school's link, contact BVSD at SafeRoutes@bvsd.org or Mia Bemelen at 
Way to Go
 (
MBemelen@drcog.org
).

For those families who live too far to bike or walk the entire distance to school, a 
park and walk
 (or bike) is an excellent choice to avoid the hassle of the hug-n-go lane. 

Get a little exercise in before school, take The 3 Block Challenge!

Select a location outside of the inner circle of the map and have your student walk or bike from there. Getting a 10-20 minute walk in before school is a great way to get the brain ready to learn!

Trip Tracker
 encourages and rewards students and families for using alternatives to single family car transportation to BVSD schools. The program goal is to significantly reduce car traffic and associated air pollution in front of schools thereby enhancing student safety and health.​ 

Students are rewarded monthly for walking, biking, carpooling and riding either the school bus or RTD. Students receive Trip Tracker dollars that can be used like cash at dozens of local 
businesses
 or donated to local 
non-profit organizations
, including your school.

Trip data is collected monthly via a Google survey. The first Trip Tracker survey of the school year will be shared with families at the end of September and the final survey will be shared at the end of April. Once the surveys are tabulated each month, Trip Tracker dollars are sent to schools, typically mid-month, to be distributed to students.

Questions? Email TripTracker@bvsd.org

 1 Walk to School Day

Wednesday, October 8, 2025

 2 Winter Bike to Work and School Day

Winter Bike to Work Day

Friday, February 13, 2026

 3 BVSD Bike Week

April 20-24, 2026

BVSD Bike to School Day

Wednesday, April 22, 2026

<

>

Powered by Finalsite
