Home - Bond

Search

Clear

Search

2025BVSD-BuildingForStudentSuccessNOCOASTV4.mp4
Your web browser does not support the <video> tag.
Check out what your tax dollars have done!

So far, BVSD has invested nearly $183M at over 30 schools, expanding opporunities to build college and career readiness, making playgrounds more inclusive, providing a new building for New Vista High School, and extending the useful life of schools across the district. 

Click here to learn more about how we are improving learning environments!

2022 Facilities Critical Needs Plan

The 
capital improvement program
 generously approved by voters in 2022 will invest in all BVSD schools to address major maintenance needs in aging buildings to extend their useful life; replace New Vista High School; pla

n for 

enrollment growth; create more Career and Technical Education opportunities; and make it easier for students of all physical abilities to enjoy our playgrounds.

Updating Aging Buildings

Expanding Educational Opportunities and Post-Graduation Readiness

Creating Universal Playgrounds

Preparing for Enrollment Growth

All students will benefit from safe, comfortable schools that are conducive to leanring, and taxpayer investments will be optimized by extending the useful life of facilities. 

BVSD owns and operates 61 buildings constructed in nearly every decade of the last 140 years. Over time, building materials and equipment age, wear out, and become outdated. BVSD must invest in maintaining and updating facilities on an ongoing basis to ensure they are safe and functional and can continue to serve students for decades to come.

In some cases, when a building has aged to the point where the cost to repair and renovate is significant enough, it makes more sense to replace the school rather than continue to invest in a worn out, out-dated building. As such, the Facilities Critical Needs Plan calls for the 70-year old New Vista High School building to be replaced with a new building on the same site.

Check out what is happening at schools at this link!

BVSD has recognized the need to expand Career and Technical Education (CTE) opportunities and is working to transform the student experience in college and career preparedness. 
The Critical Needs plan includes renovations at PK-8, middle, and high schools
 that will expand or create flexible, agile spaces where students can experience industry-inspired environments with the latest equipment, helping them acquire valuable technical skills along with the real-world, hands-on experiences that lead to high-wage and high-growth jobs that are in high-demand. 

Learn more about the CTE improvements at this link

These projects will improve ADA access and provide adaptive and accessible playgrounds so that students of all physical abilities can play together. The intent is to create play environments that are flexible enough to accommodate the individual preferences and abilities of students, with features that are easy to understand regardless of a child's knowledge, language skills, or concentration level. The renovated play areas will be usable by all students, regardless of size, body features, or mobility. There are 16 elementary playgrounds that have been prioritized because of student/school needs, however the design philosophies developed for these schools will be used to guide playground improvements at other schools. 

Learn more about the universal playground projects at this link

Continued growth, driven by several new housing developments, has the potential to bring more students to the district in Erie. With additional subdivisions planned for the area, funding is included in the Bond program to construct a new school campus, serving grades PK-5 to meet possible future demand in coming years.

Bond Program News

In October 2025,
 New Vista High School
 celebrated the completion of its nearly 75,000 square foot, $52.4M new school. 
A new photovoltaic solar array, which came online in June 2026, will almost entirely offset the building’s electricity use. Check out how students and staff are using the new building in the slide show below! 

 BVSD continues to push building performance in energy efficiency

With over 4.8 million square feet of building space and 650 acres of grounds, how BVSD builds and operates its buildings and sites is a core part of our sustainability efforts. This large footprint creates a tremendous opportunity to reduce resource consumption and emissions, and improve the health of building occupants and the planet. Some of BVSD’s recent efforts in this area include planning for decarbonization, collecting better data about energy use and expanding our solar power. 

 Read More

about BVSD continues to push building performance in energy efficiency

 Newly unveiled renovations at Apex accelerate post-high school success

Students and staff at 
BVSD's Career and Technical Education Center, Apex
 (formerly Boulder TEC) returned from Winter Break to some more completed updates to their learning spaces, thanks to 
renovations provided by the Building for Student Success program
. 

The Biomedical Sciences, Sports Medicine, Emergency Medical Technician, Criminal Justice and Teacher Academy programs are starting the second semester in larger, updated, professional-feeling new labs and classrooms. The renovated spaces feature settings for hands-on experiences and are designed to emulate the professional work environments that students will encounter when they move into careers.

 Read More

about Newly unveiled renovations at Apex accelerate post-high school success

 BVSD's Building for Student Success program completed nearly $75 million in construction projects at 22 different sites this summer

Construction crews were busy across the district this summer in the third, and largest, summer construction season for the 2022 Building for Student Success program. These projects included CTE updates, athletic and playground improvements and the final phase of a brand new high school.

 Read More

about BVSD's Building for Student Success program completed nearly $75 million in construction projects at 22 different sites this summer

 New Vista High School: A new building, same enduring values

New Vista High School's new building is more than just a structure—it’s a testament to the opportunities that arise from a shared investment in education. Thanks to the support of local voters, a new state-of-the-art facility for the students of New Vista became a reality.

 Read More

about New Vista High School: A new building, same enduring values

 Bond improvements expand opportunities for students to prepare for college and careers

A little more than a quarter of the $42 Million invested in school construction projects this summer, was invested in new construction and renovations aimed at expanding and enhancing learning spaces where students can experience hands-on learning and develop knowledge and skills directly related to potential future careers.

 Read More

about Bond improvements expand opportunities for students to prepare for college and careers

<

>

Updates to the Board of Education

May 26, 2026

February 17, 2026

A written update was provided to the Board. Read it 
here
.

October 28, 2026

June 17, 2025

Powered by Finalsite
