Bear Creek/Creekside - Boulder Valley School District

Search

Clear

Search

MyBVSD Login

Adopted Boundary Changes for the Bear Creek Elementary and Creekside Elementary Dual Enrollment Area

As part of the BVSD Board of Education’s regular review of attendance area boundaries, it adopted an attendance boundary adjustment to the Bear Creek Elementary and Creekside Elementary attendance areas at its 
Sept. 23, 2025 meeting
.

This change was proposed during the Board of Education’s review of attendance area boundaries this spring, with discussions taking place during work sessions on 
March 11
, 
May 20
, and 
Sept. 9, 2025
.

DETAILS

The change converts the Bear Creek/Creekside dual attendance area west of Broadway and north of Table Mesa to Bear Creek only. All addresses in this area are within walking distance to Bear Creek and will not receive school bus service.

The change will be effective beginning in the 2026-27 school year.

Existing boundary (Click image for a larger map)

New attendance area effective SY 2026-27 (Click image for a larger map)

This change allows for the following exception: 

All students enrolled at Creekside Elementary in the 2025-26 school year have the choice to remain at Creekside through 5th grade. School bus transportation will not be provided for students who opt to remain at Creekside.

BVSD staff will contact families in the Fall of 2025 to explain the options and support them with updating their enrollment.

WHY MAKE THIS CHANGE?

This proposal is guided by several core principles, including: 

Fostering community and neighborhood cohesion

BVSD believes there is value in supporting neighborhood-based relationships as students move through the school grades. Assigning all students in this area to Bear Creek supports neighborhood social connections. 

Aligning with geographic features such as major roads 

Broadway is a logical boundary and this change eliminates the necessity to cross Broadway to access Creekside. 

Maximization of pedestrian access to schools, and efficient use of transportation

The entire area is within walking distance of Bear Creek.

Balancing enrollment among schools in order to maintain high-quality learning experiences for students 

BVSD is committed to ensuring every student has access to high-quality learning experiences and opportunities. When enrollment is uneven across schools, it impacts funding and the ability to provide essential programs and staff, such as classroom teachers, counselors, and specialists in art, music, P.E., and libraries. Fewer students can mean fewer adults to support them, which affects the overall student experience.

Powered by Finalsite
