To: Members of the Board of Education
From: Cindy Stevenson
Date: November 6, 2017
Topic: Class Size
The information in this memo comes from Visible Learning: A Synthesis of Over 800 Meta-
Analyses Relating to Achievement by John Hattie. John Hattie is Professor of Education and
Director of the Visible Learning Labs, University of Auckland, New Zealand. The book is the
result of 15 years of research, and it synthesizes over 800 meta-analyses relating to the
influences on achievement in school-aged students. The book represents the largest collection
to date of evidence-based research into what actually works in schools to improve learning. In
Jeffco the principals did a book study of this book and I did see the strategies that have been
shown to have larger effect sizes take root in schools.
The following points summarize Hattie’s writing on class size from pages 85-88.
 It is not difficult to find claims for both sides of the class size issue. One side of the
argument is that reducing class size leads to more individualized instruction, higher
quality instruction, greater scope for innovation and student-centered teaching,
increased teacher morale, fewer disruptions, less misbehavior, and greater ease in
engaging students in academics. On the other hand, literature does not support the
claim that learning outcomes are enhanced when class size is reduced.
 It appears that reducing class size may have an effect on teacher and student work-
related conditions which may or may not translate into an effect on achievement.
 The effect size of reducing class size on student achievement is relatively small. The
effect size is remarkably consistent across multiple studies from multiple countries. The
effect size is 0.10 to 0.20. In contrast, the effect size of effective feedback is about 0.75.
The effect size should be weighed against the cost.
 The speculation from researchers is that smaller class sizes do not result in changes in
teaching strategies. When teachers use the same strategies with larger or smaller class
sizes, then achievement won’t change. When teachers use high effect size strategies,
achievement can change in average sized or smaller classes. This reality stresses the
importance of strategies and practices that do change student achievement such as the
giving of effective feedback.
 Hattie clearly states that simply reducing the number of students in front of teachers
does not change teaching strategies or student achievement. However, he also states
that increasing class size is poor policy. The critical variable is effective teaching, not
class size.
Reducing class size may contribute to student, teacher, and parent satisfaction. There may be
advantages related to attitudes and comfort. However, the research does not support class size
as a variable that impacts student achievement.