D C S M ?
OES LASS IZE ATTER
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Northwestern University
February 2014
National Education Policy Center
School of Education, University of Colorado Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0249
Telephone: (802) 383-0058
Email: NEPC@colorado.edu
http://nepc.colorado.edu
This is one of a series of briefs made possible in part by funding from
The Great Lakes Center for Education Research and Practice.
http://www.greatlakescenter.org
GreatLakesCenter@greatlakescenter.org
Kevin Welner
Project Director
Don Weitzman
Academic Editor
William Mathis
Managing Director
Erik Gunn
Managing Editor
Briefs published by the National Education Policy Center (NEPC) are blind peer-reviewed by
members of the Editorial Review Board. Visit http://nepc.colorado.edu to find all of these briefs.
For information on the editorial board and its members, visit: http://nepc.colorado.edu/editorial-
board.
Publishing Director: Alex Molnar
Suggested Citation:
Schanzenbach, D.W. (2014). Does Class Size Matter? Boulder, CO: National Education Policy
Center. Retrieved [date] from http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter.
This material is provided free of cost to NEPC's readers, who may make non-commercial use of
the material as long as NEPC and its author(s) are credited as the source. For inquiries about
commercial use, please contact NEPC at nepc@colorado.edu.
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication
DOES CLASS SIZE MATTER?
By Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, Northwestern University
Executive Summary
Public education has undergone major reforms in the last 30 years with the rise in high-
stakes testing, accountability, and charter schools, as well as the current shift toward
Common Core Standards. In the midst of these reforms, some policymakers have argued
that class size does not matter. This opinion has a popular proponent in Malcolm Gladwell,
who uses small class size as an example of a “thing we are convinced is such a big
advantage [but] might not be such an advantage at all.”
These critics are mistaken. Class size matters. Research supports the common-sense
notion that children learn more and teachers are more effective in smaller classes.
This policy brief summarizes the academic literature on the impact of class size and finds
that class size is an important determinant of a variety of student outcomes, ranging from
test scores to broader life outcomes. Smaller classes are particularly effective at raising
achievement levels of low-income and minority children.
Considering the body of research as a whole, the following policy recommendations
emerge:
 Class size is an important determinant of student outcomes, and one that can be
directly determined by policy. All else being equal, increasing class sizes will harm
student outcomes.
 The evidence suggests that increasing class size will harm not only children’s test
scores in the short run, but also their long-run human capital formation. Money
saved today by increasing class sizes will result in more substantial social and
educational costs in the future.
 The payoff from class-size reduction is greater for low-income and minority
children, while any increases in class size will likely be most harmful to these
populations.
 Policymakers should carefully weigh the efficacy of class-size policy against other
potential uses of funds. While lower class size has a demonstrable cost, it may prove
the more cost-effective policy overall.
DOES CLASS SIZE MATTER?
Introduction
Public education has undergone major reforms in the last 30 years with the rise in high-
stakes testing, accountability, and charter schools, as well as the current shift toward
Common Core Standards. The availability of new datasets that follow large numbers of
students into the workforce has allowed researchers to estimate the lifetime impact of
being taught by teachers who increase students’ standardized test scores.1 In the midst of
these new reforms and policy concerns, some have argued that class size does not matter.
This opinion has a popular proponent in Malcolm Gladwell, who uses small class size as an
example of a “thing we are convinced is such a big advantage [but] might not be such an
advantage at all.”
The critics are mistaken. Class size matters. Class size is one of the most-studied education
policies, and an extremely rigorous body of research demonstrates the importance of class
size in positively influencing student achievement. This policy brief first reviews the
research on class size. Special attention is given to the literatures in economics and related
fields that use designs aimed at disentangling causation from correlation. It then
documents the recent rise in class size and considers how to compare the effects of class-
size reduction with other commonly discussed policy alternatives.
Review of research
Research shows that students in the early grades perform better in small classes. This is
especially the case for students who come from disadvantaged backgrounds, who
experience even larger performance gains than average students when enrolled in smaller
classes. Small class sizes enable teachers to be more effective, and research has shown that
children who attend small classes in the early grades continue to benefit over their entire
lifetime.2
The importance of research design
Isolating the causal impact of policies such as class-size reduction is critical, but
challenging, for researchers. Sometimes people will argue based on less sophisticated
analyses that class size does not matter. Simple correlational arguments may be
misleading, though. Since variation in class size is driven by a host of influences, the
simple correlation between class size and outcomes is confounded by other factors.
Perhaps the most common misinterpretation is caused by low-achieving or special needs
students being systematically assigned to smaller classes. In these cases, a simple
correlation would find class size is negatively associated with achievement, but such a
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 1 of 15
finding could not be validly generalized to conclude that class size does not matter or that
smaller classes are harmful. Instead, because class size itself is correlated with other
variables that also have an impact on achievement, such as students’ special needs status,
the estimated relationship between class size and outcomes would be severely biased.
The academic research has many examples of poor-quality studies that fail to isolate the
causal impact of class size, most of them written and published prior to the so-called
“credibility revolution” in economics.3 Eric Hanushek has surveyed much of the early
research on class size, as well as other educational inputs such as per-pupil spending, in a
Importantly, small classes have been found to have positive impacts
not only on test scores during the duration of the class-size
reduction experiment, but also on life outcomes in the years after
the experiment ended.
pair of older but influential articles from 1986 and 1997, which have been revived in
Gladwell’s popularized book.4 Based on these surveys, he concluded at the time that “there
is not a strong or consistent relationship between student performance and school
resources” such as class size or spending. In a thorough re-analysis of Hanushek’s
literature summary, Krueger demonstrates that this conclusion relies on a faulty summary
of the data. In particular, Hanushek’s summary is based on 277 estimates drawn from 59
studies, but while more estimates are drawn from some studies than others, each estimate
is weighted equally. As a result, Hanushek’s literature summary places a disproportionate
weight on studies that analyzed smaller subsets of data. Krueger argues that since studies,
not individual estimates, are what are accepted for publication, weighting by study is more
appropriate than weighting by the number of estimates. When Krueger re-analyzed the
data giving each study equal weight, he found that there is indeed a systematic positive
relationship between school resources and student performance in the literature surveyed
by Hanushek.
More troubling, many of the studies included in the survey employed research designs that
would not allow researchers to isolate causal effects. For example, one-third of the studies
ignored the relationship between different measures of school inputs, and held constant
per-pupil spending while studying the “impact” of class size. Because smaller classes
cannot be had without increased spending on teachers, it is inappropriate to include
spending as a control variable and effectively hold spending constant when investigating
class size. The resulting estimate does not provide insight about the impact of reducing
class size, but instead estimates a convoluted value that is something like the impact of
reducing class size while simultaneously paying teachers less, which is unrealistic.5 Such
evidence does not reflect the impact of class size and should not be used to inform policy.6
Nonetheless, in his 2013 book David and Goliath, Malcolm Gladwell uncritically cites the
Hanushek literature summary and its argument that the class size literature is
inconclusive.7 As demonstrated below, well-designed studies generally—with a few notable
exceptions—find strong class-size impacts.
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 2 of 15
The modern research paradigm strongly prefers the use of research designs that can
credibly isolate the cause-and-effect relationship between inputs and outcomes. Scholars
generally agree that true randomized experiments, such as the Project STAR class-size
experiment described below, are the “gold standard” for isolating causal impacts. When an
experiment is not available, researchers are sometimes able to employ other techniques
that mimic experiments—termed “quasi-experiments” in the literature—that can better
infer causality.
In implementing a quasi-experimental study, there must be some sort of variation in class
size that is random or nearly random. Such variation is hard to come by, and in many cases
there is no way for researchers to isolate the impact of class size. Thus, some of the older
and better-designed studies inform the policy debate more accurately than newer studies
that employ less sophisticated and simpler correlational designs.
Evidence from Tennessee’s STAR randomized experiment
The best evidence on the impact of reducing class sizes comes from Tennessee’s Student
Teacher Achievement Ratio (STAR) experiment.8 A randomized experiment is generally
considered to be the gold standard of social science research. In STAR, over 11,500
students and 1,300 teachers in 79 Tennessee elementary schools were randomly assigned
to small or regular-sized classes from 1985-89. The students were in the experiment from
kindergarten through third grades. Because the STAR experiment employed random
assignment, any differences in outcomes can be attributed with great confidence to being
assigned to a smaller class. In other words, students were not more or less likely to be
assigned to small classes based on achievement levels, socio-economic background, or
more difficult-to-measure characteristics such as parental involvement.9
The results from STAR are unequivocal. Students’ achievement on math and reading
standardized tests improved by about 0.15 to 0.20 standard deviations (or 5 percentile
rank points) from being assigned to a small class of 13-17 students instead of a regular-
sized class of 22-25 students.10 When the results were disaggregated by race, black
students showed greater gains from being assigned to a small class, suggesting that
reducing class size might be an effective strategy to reduce the black-white achievement
gap.11 Small-class benefits in STAR were also larger for students from low socio-economic-
status families, as measured by eligibility for the free- or reduced-priced lunch program.
A follow-up study of the most effective teachers in STAR found that teachers used a variety
of strategies to promote learning and that small classes allowed them to be more effective
in employing these strategies. For example, they closely monitored the progress of student
learning in their classes, were able to re-teach using alternative strategies when children
did not learn a concept, had excellent organizational skills, and maintained superior
personal interactions with their students.12
Importantly, small classes have been found to have positive impacts not only on test scores
during the duration of the class-size reduction experiment, but also on life outcomes in the
years after the experiment ended. Students who were originally assigned to small classes
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 3 of 15
did better than their school-mates who were assigned to regular-sized classes across a
variety of outcomes, including juvenile criminal behavior, teen pregnancy, high school
graduation, college enrollment and completion, quality of college attended, savings
behavior, marriage rates, residential location and homeownership.13
Most other quasi-experimental evidence is consistent with STAR
True randomized experiments such as Tennessee’s random assignment of students across an
entire state to experimental and control groups are quite rare. Therefore, researchers must
also look for quasi-experimental approaches that allow isolation of the causal impact of class-
size reduction. Other high-quality studies that isolate the effect of small class size in
elementary school on student outcomes generally show results similar to those found in STAR.
For example, a quasi-experimental approach was used to evaluate Wisconsin’s targeted
class-size reduction program. In the Student Achievement Guarantee in Education (SAGE)
program, high-poverty school districts could apply to implement a pupil-teacher ratio of
15-to-1 in grades K-3.14 While most participating schools reduced class sizes, some schools
chose to attain the target pupil-teacher ratio by using two-teacher teams in classes of 30
students. Test scores of first-grade students in SAGE schools were higher in math, reading,
and language arts compared with the scores of those in selected comparison schools in the
same districts with average pupil-teacher ratios of 22.4 to 24.5. Attending small classes
improved student achievement by approximately 0.2 standard deviations.15
The most famous quasi-experimental approach to studying class-size reduction comes
from Angrist and Lavy’s use of a strict maximum-class-size rule in Israel and a regression
discontinuity (RD) approach.16 In Israel, there is a strict maximum class size of 40
students. As a result, class size drops dramatically when enrollment in a grade in a school
approaches the point when the rule requires the school to add a new classroom—i.e., when
enrollment tips above a multiple of 40. For example, if a grade has 80 students, then a
school could offer as few as 2 classrooms, with the maximum allowable class size of 40
students in each. If a grade has 81 students, however, the school is required to offer at
least 3 classrooms, and consequently the maximum average class size falls to 27 students.
In practice, some schools add an additional classroom prior to hitting the 40-student cap.
Nonetheless the maximum-class-size rule is a good predictor of actual class sizes and can
be used in an instrumental-variables research design to isolate the causal impact of class
size on student achievement. Using the variation in narrow bands around enrollment sizes
that are multiples of 40 students, Angrist and Lavy find strong improvements overall in
both math and reading scores, of a magnitude nearly identical to that of Project STAR’s
experimental results. Consistent with the STAR results, they also find larger improvements
among disadvantaged students.
Several subsequent papers have identified the impact of smaller class sizes using
maximum class-size rules in other international settings.17 (Note that quasi-experimental
approaches tend to require large datasets and data spanning a large number of years. Such
datasets are more likely to derive from settings outside the United States.) Most recently,
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 4 of 15
Fredriksson et al. evaluated the long-term impact of class size using data from students in
Sweden between ages 10 and 13 who were facing a maximum-class-size rule of 30
students.18 At age 13, students in smaller classes had higher cognitive and non-cognitive
skills, such as effort, motivation and self-confidence. In adulthood (between ages 27 and
42), those who had been in smaller classes had higher levels of completed education,
wages, and earnings. Urquiola used a similar regression discontinuity approach in Bolivia
and found that a one standard-deviation reduction in class size (about 8 students in his
data) improves test score performance by 0.2 to 0.3 standard deviations.19 Browning and
Heinesen derive similar results from data from Denmark, even though the average class
size is much smaller in their study (20 pupils per classroom, compared with 31 students in
Angrist and Lavy’s Israeli data).20
A different quasi-experimental approach is to use variation in enrollment driven by small
variations in cohort sizes across different years. Hoxby takes this approach using data
from the state of Connecticut, finding no statistically significant positive effect of smaller
class size.21 One drawback of the Connecticut study is that test scores are only measured in
the fall, so the impact of the prior year’s class size may be somewhat mitigated by the time
spent away from school in the summer. The discrepancy between Hoxby’s Connecticut
results and those of other studies that also use research designs capable of uncovering
causal relationships is an unresolved puzzle. Despite the overwhelming pattern in the
literature of positive class-size impacts, Malcolm Gladwell, intent on supporting his point
about what he calls the “theory of desirable difficulty,” described only the Hoxby results in
his description of research on class size in his recent book.22
Results from statewide class-size-reduction policies
Based in part on the research evidence on the impact of class-size reduction, several U.S.
states, including California, Texas and Florida, have implemented class-size caps. The
most widely studied of these policies is the 1996 California law that gave strong monetary
incentives to schools to reduce class size in grades K-3 to 20 or fewer students. Sometimes
when a new policy is introduced it is phased in slowly across locations, which gives
researchers the opportunity to compare outcomes in schools that have adopted the policy
with those that have not yet done so. In California, however, the policy was nearly
universally adopted within a short period of time, so there was very little opportunity to
compare early implementers with later implementers. Furthermore, test scores are only
available starting in grade 4, so any evaluation of the policy is forced to use test scores
from later than the year in which the reduced class size was experienced. Although there
were positive impacts on achievement due to class-size reductions on the order of 0.05 to
0.10 standard deviations, these impacts may have been offset because many inexperienced
teachers had to be hired to staff the new classrooms, reducing average teacher quality.23
Why are small classes more effective?
The mechanisms at work linking small classes to higher achievement include a mixture of
higher levels of student engagement, increased time on task, and the opportunity small
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 5 of 15
classes provide for high-quality teachers to better tailor their instruction to the students in
the class. For example, observations of STAR classrooms found that in small classes
students spent more time on task, and teachers spent more time on instruction and less on
classroom management.24 Similar results have been found in other settings.25 However,
qualitative research from the pupil-teacher ratio reduction in Wisconsin’s SAGE program
indicates that such beneficial adaptations in teachers’ practices will not necessarily occur.
It is important to provide professional-development support to instruct teachers on how to
adapt their teaching practices to smaller classes.26
In addition, small classes may have a positive impact on student “engagement behaviors,”
which include the amount of effort put forth, initiative taken, and participation by a
student. Not surprisingly, these characteristics have been shown to be important to
classroom learning. Finn finds that students who were in small classes in STAR continued
to have higher engagement ratings in subsequent grades.27
It is sometimes argued that class size only matters for inexperienced or low-quality teachers
because more effective teachers are better able to adapt their teaching styles to accommodate
larger classrooms. The evidence suggests that the opposite is true. In STAR, the positive
impacts of small classes were found to be larger for experienced teachers.28 Experienced
teachers are better able to take advantage of smaller class sizes to make pedagogical changes.
What does the evidence say about how small is small enough?
The best evidence on class-size reduction is from the STAR experiment, which estimated
substantial positive impacts from class-size reduction from an average of 22 to an average
of 15. In fact, the class sizes targeted in STAR were informed by influential work by Glass
and Smith that found strong impacts from class sizes below 20.29 Based on this, some
researchers conclude that the evidence supports better outcomes only if classes are below
some threshold number such as 15 or 20. Sometimes the argument is extended to suggest
that reducing class size is not effective unless classes are reduced to within this range. The
broader pattern in the literature finds positive impacts from class-size reductions using
variation across a wider range of class sizes, including class-size reductions mandated by
maximum class-size rules set at 30 (Sweden) or 40 (Israel). In fact, the per-pupil impact is
reasonably stable across class-size reductions of different sizes and from different baseline
class sizes. For example, when scaled by a 7-student class-size reduction as in the
Tennessee experiment, the Israeli results imply a 0.18 standard deviation increase in math
scores, which is nearly identical to the Tennessee results.30 The weight of the evidence
suggests that class-size impacts might be more or less linear across the range of class sizes
observed in the literature—that is, from roughly 15 to 40 students per class. It would be
inappropriate to extrapolate outside of this range (as is done in the Gladwell book).
Do small classes matter in later grades?
Most of the high-quality evidence on class-size reduction is based on studies of the early
grades. The available high-quality evidence on the impact of class size on outcomes in
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 6 of 15
older grades is more limited, and more research in this area is needed. A notable exception
is Dee and West, who estimate class-size effects using variation in class sizes experienced
by students across classes in different subjects, and by students taking classes from the
same teachers in different class periods. The study finds that smaller class sizes in eighth
grade have a positive impact on test scores and measures of student engagement, and finds
some evidence that these impacts are larger in urban schools.31
Recent Developments
Student-teacher ratios in public schools fell steadily over the past 40 years until recently.
Between 2008 and 2010, however, the student-teacher ratio increased by 5%, from 15.3 to
16.0 (see Figure 1). Note that actual class sizes are typically larger than student-teacher
ratios, because these ratios include special teachers who are not included in class-
16.2
16.0
15.8
15.6
15.4
15.2
15.0
14.8
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Source: Digest of Education Statistics (table 78, 2012; table 69, 2011)
Figure 1. Student/Teacher Ratios in Public Elementary
and Secondary Schools
size counts, such as teachers for students with disabilities.32 For example, imagine a grade
level in a school that contains three “regular” classes with 24 students in each and one
compensatory class with only 12. This school would have a pupil-teacher ratio of 21, even
though most of the students in that grade (in fact, 85% of them) are in classes with 24
students. This is a reason why simple correlations between class size and student outcomes
may be misleading. If some students are placed in smaller classes because they have low
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 7 of 15
performance levels, this biases the estimate of the positive effect of small classes
downward.33
According to the Schools and Staffing Survey, in 2011-12 the average United States class
size for public primary school teachers in self-contained classes was 21.6, up from 20.3 in
2007-08.34 During this time frame, the recession forced California to abandon its class-size
reduction policy, which had provided incentives for districts to adopt a 20-student cap in
grades K through 3.35 In response, the average K-3 class size increased from 23 students in
2008-09 to 26 students in 2012-13.
Table 1. Hypothetical Distribution of Students
with Different Numbers of Teachers
Allocation with Allocation with
24 teachers 23 teachers
Grade Enrollment Number Class size Number Class size
of classes of classes
K 100 4 25 4 25
1 100 4 25 4 25
2 100 4 25 4 25
3 100 4 25 4 25
4 100 4 25 4 25
5 100 4 25 3 33.3
Total 600 24 23
Average class size 25 26.4
Average pupil-teacher ratio 25 26.1
Small increases in average class sizes can mask large class-size increases in some districts
and schools. For example, sometimes policymakers will calculate the cost savings from
increasing the average class size by a single student, arguing or implying that the impact
on test scores from this “modest” one-student increase will be negligible.36 This line of
reasoning is misleading because actual classes and teachers are not easily divisible into
fractions.37 As illustrated in Table 1, imagine a K-5 school that has 100 students in each
grade with four classrooms for each grade. Each of the 24 classes in the school has a class
size of 25 students. If this school had to lay off one fifth-grade teacher, the aggregate
numbers would not increase very much. The average pupil-teacher ratio would increase
only slightly, from 25.0 to 26.1, while the average class size would increase from 25.0 to
26.4. These averages mask the sharp increase in class size experienced by the fifth-grade
students, from 25 to 33.3. The negative impact of increasing class size by 8 students in
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 8 of 15
fifth grade would be expected to be sizeable, but it might not raise alarms to the average
parent told that the pupil-teacher ratio increased by only 1 student.38
Discussion and Analysis
Recently some policymakers and education analysts have argued that manipulating other
educational inputs would be more effective or more cost-effective than class-size
reduction. By and large, though, these suggestions do not pit class-size reductions against
some other policy alternative that has been implemented and evaluated. It is only
appropriate to compare effectiveness across a variety of policy alternatives.
For example, recent studies have found that teachers with high value added on
standardized test scores also have an impact on such subsequent outcomes for their
students as wage earnings.39 Based on these findings, some argue that giving students a
high-test-score value-added teacher is more cost-effective than class-size policy. The
problem with this suggestion is that there are few—if any—policies that have been
designed, implemented and evaluated that increase the availability of teachers with high-
test-score value added and result in higher student achievement. It’s one thing to measure
the impact of teachers on their students’ standardized test scores, but it is a separate
challenge to design a policy lever to bring more teachers into the classroom who can raise
test scores. A recent report from the Institute of Education Sciences documents that
disadvantaged students are taught by teachers with lower value added on tests.40 At this
point we know relatively little about how to increase teacher quality, much less how much
it will cost to induce more high-quality teachers to work and stay in the schools that need
them. Much more needs to be done in terms of pilot programs, policy design and
evaluation before improving teacher quality can be considered a viable policy option.
Another proposal has been floated (e.g. by Bill Gates) to pay high-quality teachers bonus
payments for taking on extra students.41 It is certainly possible that such a reallocation of
students could increase overall achievement, but it is also possible that it would backfire.
For example, imagine a school with a grade containing two classes. One teacher is an
excellent, experienced teacher, while the other is an untested, first-year “rookie” teacher.
One option would be for both teachers to get classes with 25 students. Another option
would be to pay the experienced teacher a bonus to take a class of 29 students, leaving the
rookie teacher with a class of 21 students. All else equal, children in the experienced
teacher’s class would likely record lower test score gains if there were 29 students than if
there were 25, but these gains would be enjoyed by more students. Perhaps the 21 students
in the rookie teacher’s classroom would be better off than if they would have been in a
classroom of 25 students, though the research is less clear about whether the rookie
teacher will be more effective in a small class. In this hypothetical case, it is possible that
the aggregate test score gains could be larger when the classrooms have unequal sizes,
especially if the experienced teacher is substantially more skilled at raising test scores than
the rookie teacher. Whether it is an effective policy, however, hinges crucially on a variety
of factors: how large the skill differential is between teachers, how large a bonus payment
is required to induce the experienced teacher to accept a larger class, what the next best
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 9 of 15
use is for the funds used for the bonus payment, and whether the gains persist over time.
While this is a potentially interesting area for policy development, much more pilot testing
needs to be done before it could be considered a credibly policy alternative to class-size
reduction.
Recommendations
The academic literature strongly supports the common-sense notion that class size is an
important determinant of student outcomes. Class-size reduction has been shown to
improve a variety of measures, ranging from contemporaneous test scores to later-life
outcomes such as college completion.
Based on the research literature, I offer the following policy recommendations:
 Class size is an important determinant of student outcomes and one that can be
directly influenced by policy. All else being equal, increasing class sizes will harm
student outcomes.
 The evidence suggests that increasing class size will harm not only children’s test
scores in the short run but also their long-term human capital formation. Money
saved today by increasing class sizes will be offset by more substantial social and
educational costs in the future.
 The payoff from class-size reduction is larger for low-income and minority children,
while any increases in class size will likely be most harmful to these populations.
 Policymakers should carefully weigh the efficacy of class-size-reduction policy
against other potential uses of funds. While lower class size has a demonstrable
cost, it may prove the more cost-effective policy overall.
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 10 of 15
Notes and References
1 Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W., & Yagan D. (2011). How does your
kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126(4), 1593-1660;
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., & Rockoff J. (2013). Measuring the impacts of teachers II: Teacher value-added and
student outcomes in adulthood (Working Paper No. 19424). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
2 Word, E., Johnston, J., Bain, H.P., et al. (1990). Student/Teacher Achievement Ratio (STAR): Tennessee’s K-3
class size study. Final summary report 1985-1990. Nashville: Tennessee State Department of Education;
Krueger, A.B. (1999). Experimental estimates of education production functions. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(2), 497-532;
Krueger, A.B., & Whitmore, D. (2001). The effect of attending a small class in the early grades on college test-
taking and middle school test results: Evidence from Project STAR. Economic Journal, 111, 1-28;
Krueger, A.B., & Whitmore, D. (2002). Would smaller classes help close the black-white achievement gap? In J.
Chubb & T. Loveless (Eds.), Bridging the Achievement Gap (11-46). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press;
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W., & Yagan D. (2011). How does your
kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126(4), 1593-1660;
Dynarski, S., Hyman, J., & Schanzenbach, D.W. (2013). Experimental evidence on the effect of childhood
investments on postsecondary attainment and degree completion. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
32(4), 692-717;
Finn, J., Gerber, S., & Boyd-Zaharias, J. (2005). Small classes in the early grades, academic achievement, and
graduating from high school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 214-223;
Molnar, A., Smith, P., Zahorik, J., Palmer, A., Halbach, A., & Ehrle, K. (1999). Evaluating the SAGE program: A
pilot program in targeted pupil-teacher reduction in Wisconsin. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
21(2), 165-77;
Angrist, J.D., & Lavy, V. (1999). Using Maimonides’ rule to estimate the effect of class size on scholastic
achievement. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 533-575;
Fredriksson, P., Öckert, B., & Oosterbeek, H. (2013). Long-term effects of class size. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128(1), 249-285;
Urquiola, M. (2006). Identifying class size effects in developing countries: Evidence from rural Bolivia. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 88(1), 171-177;
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 11 of 15
Browning, M., & Heinesen, E. (2007). Class Size, teacher hours and educational attainment. The Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 109(2), 415-438.
2 Fredriksson, P., Öckert, B., & Oosterbeek, H. (2013). Long-term effects of class size. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128(1), 249-285.
3 Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. S. (2010). The credibility revolution in empirical economics: How better research
design is taking the con out of econometrics. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 3-30.
4 Hanushek, E.A. (1986, September). The economics of schooling: Production and efficiency in public schools.
Journal of Economic Literature, 24, 1141-77;
Hanushek, E.A. (1997). Assessing the effects of school resources on student performance: An Update.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19(2), 141-64.
5 See the following for more detailed descriptions of this problem:
Krueger, A.B. (2003). Economic considerations and class size. Economic Journal, 113(485), F34-F63;
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. S. (2010). The credibility revolution in empirical economics: How better research
design is taking the con out of econometrics. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 3-30.
6 Krueger, A.B. (2003). Economic considerations and class size. Economic Journal, 113(485), F34-F63.
7 Gladwell, M. (2013). David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits, and the Art of Battling Giants. New York: Little,
Brown & Company.
8 Mosteller, Frederick (1995). The Tennessee study of class size in the early school grades. The Future of Children,
5(2), 113-127.
9 Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W., & Yagan D. (2011). How does your
kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126(4), 1593-1660.
10 Word, E., Johnston, J., Bain, H.P., et al. (1990). Student/Teacher Achievement Ratio (STAR): Tennessee’s K-3
Class Size Study. Final summary report 1985-1990. Nashville: Tennessee State Department of Education;
Krueger, A.B. (1999). Experimental estimates of education production functions. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(2), 497-532;
Krueger, A.B., & Whitmore, D. (2001). The effect of attending a small class in the early grades on college test-
taking and middle school test results: Evidence from Project STAR. Economic Journal, 111, 1-28.
11 Krueger, A.B., & Whitmore, D. (2002). Would smaller classes help close the black-white achievement gap? In J.
Chubb & T. Loveless (Eds.), Bridging the Achievement Gap (11-46). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press.
12 Bain, H., Lintz, N., & Word, E. (1989). A study of fifty effective teachers whose class average gain scores
ranked in the top 15% of each of four school types in Project STAR. ERIC Clearinghouse; paper presented at the
American Educational Research Association 1989 meeting, San Francisco, CA.
13 Krueger, A.B. (1999). Experimental estimates of education production functions. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(2), 497-532;
Krueger, A.B., & Whitmore, D. (2001). The effect of attending a small class in the early grades on college test-
taking and middle school test results: Evidence from Project STAR. Economic Journal, 111, 1-28;
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 12 of 15
Krueger, A.B., & Whitmore, D. (2002). Would smaller classes help close the black-white achievement gap? In J.
Chubb & T. Loveless (Eds.), Bridging the Achievement Gap (11-46). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press;
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W., & Yagan D. (2011). How does your
kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126(4), 1593-1660;
Dynarski, S., Hyman, J., & Schanzenbach, D.W. (2013). Experimental evidence on the effect of childhood
investments on postsecondary attainment and degree completion. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
32(4), 692-717;
Finn, J., Gerber, S., & Boyd-Zaharias, J. (2005). Small classes in the early grades, academic achievement, and
graduating from high school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 214-223.
14 Molnar, A., Smith, P., Zahorik, J., Palmer, A., Halbach, A., & Ehrle, K. (1999). Evaluating the SAGE program: A
pilot program in targeted pupil-teacher reduction in Wisconsin. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
21(2), 165-77.
15 Molnar, A., Smith, P., Zahorik, J., Palmer, A., Halbach, A., & Ehrle, K. (1999). Evaluating the SAGE program: A
pilot program in targeted pupil-teacher reduction in Wisconsin. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
21(2), 165-77.
16 Angrist, J.D., & Lavy, V. (1999). Using Maimonides’ rule to estimate the effect of class size on scholastic
achievement. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 533-575.
17 Fredriksson, P., Öckert, B., & Oosterbeek, H. (2013). Long-term effects of class size. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128(1), 249-285;
Urquiola, M. (2006). Identifying class size effects in developing countries: Evidence from rural Bolivia. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 88(1), 171-177;
Browning, M., & Heinesen, E. (2007). Class Size, teacher hours and educational attainment. The Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 109(2), 415-438.
18 Fredriksson, P., Öckert, B., & Oosterbeek, H. (2013). Long-term effects of class size. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128(1), 249-285.
19 Urquiola, M. (2006). Identifying class size effects in developing countries: Evidence from rural Bolivia. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 88(1), 171-177.
20 Browning, M., & Heinesen, E. (2007). Class Size, teacher hours and educational attainment. The Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 109(2), 415-438.
21 Hoxby, C. M. (2000). The effects of class size on student achievement: New evidence from population variation.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1239-1285.
22 “Desirable difficulties,” according to Gladwell, are ones that force an individual to adapt to a disadvantage, and
in that adaptation enable them to be better prepared to overcome future challenges.
23 Unlu, F. (2005). California class size reduction reform: New findings from the NAEP. Princeton, NJ:
Department of Economics, Princeton University;
Jepsen, C., & Rivkin, S. (2009). Class size reduction and student achievement: The potential tradeoff between
teacher quality and class size. Journal of Human Resources, 44(1), 223-250.
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 13 of 15
24 Evertson, C., & Randolph, C. (1989). Teaching practices and class size: A new look at an old issue. Peabody
Journal of Education, 67(1), 85-105
25 Blatchford, P., Goldstein, H., Martin, C., & Browne, W. (2002). A study of class size effects in English school
reception year classes. British Educational Research Journal, 28(2), 169-185.
26 Graue, E., Hatch, K., Rao, K., & Oen, D. (2007). The wisdom of class size reduction. American Educational
Research Journal, 44(3), 670-700.
27 Finn, J.D. (1997). Class Size: What does research tell Us? Spotlight on Student Success #207;
Finn, J., Pannozzo, G., & Achilles, C. (2003). The ‘why’s’ of class size: Student behavior in small classes. Review
of Educational Research, 73(3), 321-368.
28 Schanzenbach, D.W. (2007). What have researchers learned from Project STAR? Brookings Papers on
Education Policy. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution;
Lazear, E.P. (2001). Educational Production. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 777-803.
29 Glass, G.V., & Smith, M.L. (1979). Meta-analysis of research on class size and achievement. Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 1(1), 2-16.
30 Angrist, J.D., & Pischke, J.S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press. See page 267.
31 Boozer, M., & Rouse, C. (2001). Intraschool variation in class size: Patterns and implications. Journal of Urban
Economics, 50(1), 163-189;
Dee, T., & West, M. (2011). The non-cognitive returns to class size. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
33(1), 23-46.
32 Executive Office of the President (2012, August). Investing in our future: Returning teachers to the classroom.
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved January 10, 2014, from
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/Investing_in_Our_Future_Report.pdf.
33 Boozer, M., & Rouse, C. (2001). Intraschool variation in class size: patterns and implications. Journal of Urban
Economics, 50(1), 163-189.
34 National Center for Education Statistics (2013). Schools and staffing survey: 2011-12 (Table 7). Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Education;
National Center for Education Statistics (2009). Characteristics of public, private, and Bureau of Indian
Education elementary and secondary school teachers in the United States: Results from the 2007-08 schools and
staffing survey (Table 8). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
35 Yamamura, K. (2013, January). California retreats on class-size reduction. The Sacramento Bee, 1A.
36 Whitehurst, G.J., & Chingos, M.M. (2011). Class Size: What research says and what it means for state policy.
Washington, DC: Brown Center on Education Policy at the Brookings Institution.
37 Indeed, this is why provisions such as the maximum class-size rule in Israel are so effective: when a school sees
an enrollment increase from 40 to 41, it has to hire an entire additional teacher and cannot instead hire a fraction
of one. As a result, average class size declines sharply when a second teacher is hired (from 40 to 41/2=20.5).
38 Sims, D. (2008). A strategic response to class size reduction: Combination classes and student achievement in
California. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(3), 457-478.
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 14 of 15
39 Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W., & Yagan D. (2011). How does your
kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126(4), 1593-1660.
40 NCEE Evaluation Brief (2014). Do disadvantaged students get less effective teaching? Key findings from recent
Institute of Education Sciences studies. Washington, DC: Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. Retrieved January 20, 2014, from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20144010/pdf/20144010.pdf.
41 Dillon, S. (2011, March). Tight budgets mean squeeze in classrooms. The New York Times, A1;
Gates, B. (2011, February). How teacher development could revolutionize our schools. The Washington Post.
Retrieved January 27, 2014, from
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2011/02/27/AR2011022702876.html.
http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/does-class-size-matter 15 of 15