Long Range Advisory Committee Metrics and Recommendations
June 13, 2023
Setting the Stage
T
Similar to numerous school districts across the country, BVSD is experiencing enrollment
decline caused by a variety of factors including escalating housing costs, delayed childbirth
and overall declining birth rates among others. Declining enrollment impacts BVSD’s finances
and our ability to provide high-quality educationFal experiences for students in all schools.
As enrollment in a school declines it becomes harder and more expensive on a per pupil basis
to create a thriving student and educator experience at that school. Specifically at the
elementary level, enrollment that falls below two classes per grade at a school starts to create
A
funding inefficiencies in the staffing and operation of the school because fixed costs (e.g.
utilities; support and administrative staff; art, music, and physical education teachers) are
higher per student. In addition, fewer resources can make it more difficult for a school to
implement strategic plan initiatives (such as MTSS, Data Driven Instruction, collaboration
around instructionaRl practices and assessments, coordinating interventions and enrichment)
because it is challenging for the school to establish time, personnel, and resources for this
work. The efficient use of resources districtwide will maintain the provision of quality
educational programming for all BVSD students.
As enrollment shrinks, BVSD buildings continue to age, with major capital maintenance
D
expenses predicted over the next 10 years and beyond.
BVSD has a responsibility to both provide a high-quality and equitable educational experience
to all students and manage district resources and capital assets in a fiscally responsible
manner. It should be noted that charter schools are managed by independent boards and are
not subject to the proposals described in this document.
At this time, the discussion of how to respond to enrollment decline is focused at the
elementary level because the impacts are being seen and felt more dramatically at that level. In
the coming years, BVSD will also need to consider how enrollment decline is impacting the
student experience at the middle and high school levels.
Guiding principles included in this document provide guardrails for these conversations.
Metrics
To assist the Board of Education with future decision-making in light of the challenges posed
by declining enrollment, the Long Range Advisory Committee proposes the following:
ANNUAL REPORT
Beginning in February 2024, staff will provide an annual update enrollment trend report to the
T
Board of Education regarding school utilization which also includes number of classes per
grade level and five-year enrollment projections by school.
TIER 1 ENROLLMENT ADVISORY PHASE
F
IF the annual report indicates that If an elementary school has fewer than two classes per
grade level and enrollment is less than 60% of capacity, the Board and community should be
aware:
A
THEN: Tier 1 Small School Designation
The elementary school operates under the following conditions:
● Resource allocation will adhere to the established staffing funding formula to the
R
greatest extent possible
● Multi-age classrooms may be necessary to meet the funding formula
● Library, counseling, and specials may be limited
TIER 2 COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PHASE
D
IF If an elementary school’s enrollment continues to decline below 50% capacity and fewer
than 1.5 average classes per grade level with a projected trend to continue for at least 5 years:
THEN: Tier 2: Community Engagement Process
The Board will engage staff to lead a community-based process to develop possible solutions
to be considered by the Board to provide a thriving, well-resourced educational environment for
students and staff. The community may vary depending on the school, circumstances, and
proposed actions. It will need to be clarified when an engagement process is initiated, and
potentially adjusted, in light of possible responsive actions. People who may be affected by a
significant change at a school would be considered part of the community and could include
families of the school(s), neighbors or a neighborhood, and families that might have an interest
or need for new or different programming. Decision-making should be in the context of looking
at geographic areas or multiple schools at the same time if appropriate. Timeline will be
established by the Board.
The outcome of this process may result in one or more of the following recommendations that
could include but are not limited to:
Final DRAFT LRAC Metrics and Recommendations | June 13, 2023
● Continuing to operate at the established staffing funding formula with “small school”
status (i.e. Tier 1 operating conditions)
● Focus or specialized programming
● Reallocate grade levels with neighboring school
● Changes to open enrollment preferences and/or boundary changes
● Closure/Consolidation
Particular options will be evaluated by staff as possible respoTnsive actions when schools are
in the Community Engagement Process. identified on Tier2 . Implemented changes may need
to be re-evaluated if enrollment does not stabilize or increase.
This process and proposed solutions will be evaluated by the following guiding principles
F
proposed by the LRAC: and adopted by the Board.
Guiding Principles
● Equity and access should bAe at the heart of every recommendation or decision in the
enrollment context. Consideration should be given regarding impacts to historically
underserved populations. In BVSD, equity includes but is not limited to: removing
institutional barriers, embracing and respecting diversity, enhancing inclusion,
intentional support for students, staff, family and community, culturally responsive
R
teaching, learning, and leading.
● Data should play a significant role in the decision-making process.
● Due to their unique geographic circumstances, mountain schools require differentiated
decisions.
D
● Decisions should aim to maximize efficient use of resources for all students.
● It should be understood that change is hard, and communities will need to be
supported through any transition.
● Municipalities should be included in conversations about closing or consolidating
schools.
● The facility condition and the cost to modernize an existing school to meet educational
specifications should be taken into consideration.
● District-wide responses and optimization of resources should also be explored when
appropriate.
Recommended Board Actions
● Evaluate Open Enrollment Policy JECC & JECC-R
Final DRAFT LRAC Metrics and Recommendations | June 13, 2023
● Study current attendance boundaries (Policy JC) to identify possible changes that
could rebalance numbers of resident students within an attendance area
● Conduct community surveys to identify desired or unmet needs, priorities, and
preferences of the community
Important Considerations
T
As the District and the community move toward considering specific actions to take in
response to enrollment changes there are a number of factors and ancillary outcomes that
need to be considered.
Transportation F
Actions such as consolidating schools or placing a new program at a school will create
different student transportation needs. Students may need to travel farther, which may make
them eligible for school bus transportation or require a car trip rather than traveling by foot or
bike. Additional vehicles on the road may create more emissions and congestion. Additionally,
A
student commute time may increase. The ongoing bus driver shortage may be a limiting factor.
Future capital construction/maintenance costs
School buildings will continue to age and will require major, high cost major maintenance at
regular intervals. These costs should be a consideration when evaluating continuing to operate
R
a building. Additionally, the costs associated with renovating a building for additional
enrollment or a change of program should also be considered.
Environmental sustainability
BVSD has made an organizational commitment to sustainability. Proposed actions should be
D
evaluated in terms of impact to sustainability. Factors such as the cost and consumption of
resources to operate and maintain underutilized buildings should be considered. Conversely,
some proposed actions may adversely affect sustainability such as increasing vehicular miles
traveled.
Final DRAFT LRAC Metrics and Recommendations | June 13, 2023