Board of Education | June 13, 2023
Long Range Advisory Committee
Process and Recommendations
Enrollment Big Picture
BVSD has been anticipating a gradual decline in enrollment in future years.
COVID-related enrollment loss accelerated this decline dramatically. Declining
numbers of students can lead to budget reductions, inefficient facility operations
and most importantly, a less comprehensive educational experience for
students at schools with smaller populations.
2
Long Range Advisory Committee 2
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations
Background
3
LRAC Process Overview
Sep. Oct. Nov. Jan. Dec. Feb. Mar. May June
LRAC Mtg. LRAC Mtg. LRAC Mtg. LRAC Mtg. LRAC Mtg. LRAC Mtg. LRAC Mtg.
● Enrollment ● Preschool ● School types ● Projections ● Discussion ● Revise ● Revise
data ● Impacts of ● 5-year from new of proposal proposal proposal to
declining projections housing reflect
enrollment ● Guiding ● OE review feedback
● OE matrices framework ● Program &
financial
viability
Board Board Board Board Work Board
Meeting Meeting Meeting Session Meeting
● Membership ● Enrollment ● Purpose ● Process ● Final
● Committee ● Process review recommen-
meetings ● Enrollment ● Enrollment dations
● Timeline projections review
(students & ● Program and
rounds) fiscal
● Program impacts
impacts ● Metrics and
● Fiscal recommen-
impacts dations
● Overview of
metrics
4
Last 10 Years KG-12 (Non-Charter)
Year
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 5
stnedutS
fo
rebmuN
2020 & 2021
strongly impacted
by COVID-19
Start of
elementary
decline
*
5-year K-12 Enrollment Projection (Non-Charter)
smaller elementary cohorts progressing to secondary
25,158 24,736
24,247 23,835
23,375 23,017
*Preschool not included
due to the difficulty to
assess demand and due
to it’s disconnect with
school attendance areas.
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 6
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations
The Challenge
7
LRAC Purpose
To develop recommendations to ensure sound
long-term facility decisions consistent with the needs
of the school district and in support of the school
district’s strategic initiatives
What LRAC IS
● An opportunity to develop metrics and guiding
principles for the Board to use in future decision
making related to responding to how declining
enrollment impacts student & staff experiences
and district finances
What LRAC is NOT
● A committee to solve declining enrollment
● A committee to solve affordable housing
● A committee to generate marketing ideas
● A committee to address declining birth rates
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 8
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations
LRAC Proposal and
Recommendations
9
LRAC Final Recommendation | June 13, 2023
Initial Proposal
10
Initial Proposal
● Annual Report
○ Staff will provide an annual update to the Board regarding school
utilization, number of classes per grade level and five-year
enrollment projections by school.
● Tier 1: Small School Designation
○ Transparency related to school funding allocations
● Tier 2: Community Engagement Process
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 11
LRAC Final Recommendation | June 13, 2023
Revised Proposal
12
Revised Proposal
● Process and Metrics
○ Annual report
○ Enrollment Advisory phase
○ Community Engagement phase
● Recommended Board Actions
○ Study Open Enrollment policy
○ Study attendance area
boundaries
○ Information gathering
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 13
Annual Report
Beginning in February of 2024, staff will provide an annual update to the Board of
Education regarding school utilization which also includes number of classes per
grade level and five-year enrollment projections by school.
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 14
Enrollment Advisory Phase
If an elementary school has fewer than two classes per grade level
and enrollment is less than 60% of capacity, the Board and
community should be aware:
● Resource allocation will adhere to the established staffing
funding formula to the greatest extent possible.
● Multi-age classrooms may be necessary to meet the funding
formula.
● Library, counseling, and specials may be limited.
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 15
Community Engagement Phase
If an elementary school’s enrollment continues to decline below 50% capacity and fewer
than 1.5 average classes per grade level with a projected trend to continue for at least 5
years, the Board will engage staff to lead a community-based process to develop possible
solutions to provide a thriving, well-resourced educational environment for students and
staff. Decision-making should be in the context of looking at geographic areas or multiple
schools if appropriate. Timeline will be established by the Board.
This process may result in recommendations that could include but are not limited to:
● Continuing to operate at the established staffing funding formula
● Focus or specialized programming
● Reallocate grade levels with neighboring school
● Closure/Consolidation
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 16
Guiding Principles
● Equity and access should be at the heart of every recommendation or decision in the enrollment
context. Consideration should be given regarding impacts to historically underserved
populations.
● Data should play a significant role in the decision-making process.
● Due to their unique geographic circumstances, mountain schools require differentiated
decisions.
● Decisions should aim to maximize efficient use of resources for students across the district.
● It should be understood that change is hard, and communities will need to be supported through
any transition.
● Municipalities should be included in conversations about closing or consolidating schools.
● The facility condition and the cost to modernize an existing school to meet educational
specifications should be taken into consideration.
● District-wide responses and optimization of resources should also be explored when appropriate.
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 17
Additional Considerations
● Transportation
○ Fewer schools = more transportation needs = more vehicles on the road
○ Student commute time may increase.
○ Driver shortage may be a limiting factor.
● Future capital construction/maintenance costs
○ Aging buildings will continue to have large maintenance costs.
○ Program changes at a school may necessitate building renovations.
● Environmental sustainability
○ Consider the environmental cost of proposed actions, e.g. resources
consumed to operate buildings at 50% capacity or fuel consumption and
emissions increase associated with more students traveling longer distances
by vehicle
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 18
Recommended Board Actions
● Evaluate Open Enrollment Policy JECC & JECC-R
● Study current attendance boundaries (Policy JC) to identify possible
changes that could rebalance numbers of resident students within an
attendance area
● Conduct community surveys to identify desired or unmet needs,
priorities, and preferences of the community
Long Range Advisory Committee Process and Recommendations 19
Next Steps
● Direction from Board
● LRAC study secondary
school enrollment trends
LLoonngg RRaannggee AAddvviissoorryy CCoommmmiitttteeee PPrroocceessss aanndd RReeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss 2200
Questions?
21