Boulder Valley School
District File: JECC‐R
Revised: November 1, 202 1 , November 8 , 2022 , February _ __, 202 4
SCHOOL CHOICE PROCEDURE (OPEN ENROLLMENT)
Process and Timelines
The School District will no0fy resident students and their parents/guardians on an annual
basis of the school choice op0ons available through open enrollment in sufficient 0me to
apply. No0ce will iden0fy specific steps to apply for choice enrollment and 0melines that
are enforceable, including:
• an applica0on deadline no earlier than January 1
• a deadline of not more than ten (10) days for the parent/guardian to accept and
complete enrollment for awarded choice seats or the seat will be forfeited
• an opportunity for any student who missed the applica0on deadline to submit an
applica0on prior to the last business day of August to add the student’s name to
the boIom of an established wait list. New residents of the School District filing an
ini0al applica0on shall be added at the top of late applica0ons added to an
established wait list.
• the ability of students to enroll to choice seats from wait lists to fill vacant spots as
available following the loIery through August, for some charter schools un0l
September 3, and for other charter schools on a space available basis year round
To help families make decisions, the School District will make school choice and
enrollment data, including length of waitlists, as accessible as possible.
Preschool
Due to complexi0es in Colorado law, preschool assignments in BVSD shall not be subject to open
enrollment procedures and shall not impact students’ school assignments for kindergarten.
District and School Annual Enrollment
For annual school assignment, students within designated aIendance areas will have priority in
registering in that neighborhood school. Students may apply for open enrollment in a school outside
their aIendance area and will be admiIed if there is space available in the requested school and
program.
Page 1 of 3
School District Preferences
The loIery shall incorporate preferences as follows:
1. BVSD students wishing to return from a choice school to their designated neighborhood
school for the next school year.
1.2. In-district students who move out of their School District designated neighborhood
school aIendance area but who remain in the School District and wish to remain at the
school the student is currently aIending.
2.3. Sibling/Household preferences:
a. A new student, whether they reside inside or outside of the district, whose
sibling/household member has been in aIendance and will be aIending the
requested school the following year.
b. A sibling/household member of a student accep0ng placement during the same
open enrollment period.
Note: When mul0ple siblings/household members apply for open enrollment at the
same school and in choice order, they will be linked as siblings/household members in
the loIery process.
3.4. A student of an eligible employee, whether they reside inside or outside of the
district. Eligible employees must be working for BVSD at the 0me of the applica0on and
on the first day of the applicable school year.
NOTE: If there is an enrollment opening at the 0me of employment, an employee’s
children may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space available, the employee’s
enrollment preference will be applied in the following school year or the next
available space.
4. BVSD students wishing to return to their designated neighborhood school.
5. Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.
6. Current students who move outside the boundaries of BVSD and wish to remain for a
future school year in the BVSD school the student is currently aIending.
Page 2 of 3
7. Students who reside outside the boundaries of BVSD and are not currently aIending a
BVSD school.
School Preferences
Bilingual/Dual Language Programs
When applying to Bilingual and Dual Language Programs, na0ve English speaking students in grades 1st
through 5th should have an educa0onal background in a bilingual program and will be assessed by the
school to determine program appropriateness prior to final acceptance.
Charter Schools
BVSD is commiIed to equitable criteria for open enrollment to all BVSD schools, and the elimina0on of
special and legacy preferences for school founders and alumni, and for those who have applied for
admission previously. BVSD intends for charter school admission criteria to be incorporated into
charter contracts and not revised annually.
End File: JECC-R
Page 3 of 3