Boulder Valley School District
File: JECC
Adopted: January 10, 1991
Revised: February ___, 2024
SCHOOL ASSIGNMENT OF STUDENTS TO AND SCHOOLS CHOICE
The Board of Education supports a variety of high quality educational programs. The Board’s
enrollment policies, including open enrollment, are intended to:
o Encourage all students residing in Boulder Valley SD to attend BVSD schools
o Provide clear, accessible and proactive information about schools and choice
o Ensure equitable access to school choice opportunities
o Support stability for schools and households
o Enable employees to enroll their students as an employee benefit
o Offer opportunities for enrollment by out of district students
School Assignment
BVSD students may attend their designated neighborhood school (based on home address), or
their parent/guardian may submit an application for open enrollment to another BVSD school.
neighborhood school, a focus school (meets BVSD standards but may have a different
curriculum or philosophy), or a charter school (an independent school within the School
District). Students who reside outside BVSD also may apply for open enrollment in accordance
with this Policy.
Other than as assigned through open enrollment, sStudents are expected to attend
the school which lies within the attendance area in which they live, with the following
exceptions:
1. If a school is overcrowded, the School District may assign students may be assigned
to other schools where space is available..
2. Principals may arrange for assignment of a student to a school other than the one in
his or her designated attendance area.
2. If needed to address appropriate working and learning environments, the School
District may administratively place students in accordance with Board Policy.
3. If requested by a parent/guardian, the School District may grantPermission may be
granted an administrative transfer for a student to enroll in a school outside his or
her attendance area, but within the Boulder Valley School District, based upon
available spacein accordance with Board Policy.
3.
Whenever a student is assigned to a school outside his or her designated attendance area,
transportation shall be the responsibility of the parents, unless regular bus transportation
provided by the School District can bring the student within a reasonable distance of the
school to which he or she is transferring, and the bus is not already at capacity. The
exception shall be those students described in the first situation, above.
Requests granted will be approved for the duration of that school level (elementary,
middle level, or high school). Students must reapply, however, when moving from one
level to the next, if still seeking assignment under open enrollment.
School Choice
To provide equitable access to school choice, the School District shall strive to proactively
deliver information to all members of our community through multiple modalities, including
direct outreach to under-represented community members, online materials, and in-person
opportunities. Information and application materials will be offered in as many community
languages as possible.
Approval of open enrollment is based on available space, programming, and staffing at the
requested school. Some schools/grade levels may have no spaces to offer, and BVSD reserves
the right to retain space for projected student enrollment. When the number of applicants
exceeds the number of spaces available, students will be selected by a random selection
lottery.
In implementing open enrollment, the School District is not required to:
1. Make alterations in the structure of a requested school or make alterations to the
arrangement or function of rooms within a requested school
2. Allocate additional staff within a particular program or school requested
3. Establish and offer any particular program in a school if such program is not offered
currently in such school
4. Alter or waive nondiscriminatory eligibility criteria for participation in a particular
program
Open enrollment requests granted will be approved for the duration of that school level
(elementary, middle level, or high school), and the selected school becomes the “school of
attendance” through the highest grade offered at the school, unless school assignment under
this Policy necessitates adjustments to enrollment at particular schools or programs. Students
must reapply when moving from one school level to the next, if still seeking assignment under
open enrollment.
Students with Disabilities
Students with an active Individual Education Plan (IEP) have the same opportunity to open
enroll as all students. The open enrollment application does not request information about
disability status and admits all students through the lottery. Once a student has been admitted
and completes the online enrollment process, the School District will convene as necessary an
IEP team to determine whether the selected school can deliver a free appropriate public
education (FAPE) and to consider the parent/guardian’s input on location. If the IEP team
determines that FAPE is not available in the school of choice, the School District will issue a
prior written notice in accordance with federal and state law.
Athletic and Activities Eligibility
Students assigned to schools through choice will have the same curricular and extracurricular
status as all other students attending the school, as determined by applicable law, bylaws of
the Colorado High School Activities Association, and the School District´s eligibility
requirements.
Bilingual/Dual Language Programs
When applying to Bilingual and Dual Language Programs, native English speaking students
should have an educational background in a bilingual program and will be assessed by the
school to determine program appropriateness prior to final acceptance.
Data
The Superintendent shall create data systems that provide information on open enrollment,
discern trends, help families make decisions, and facilitate program improvement and
planning.
LEGAL REF: C.R.S. § 19-1-115.5 (foster home establishes residence)
C.R.S. § 22-1-102 (2) (definition of resident of district)
C.R.S. § 22-20-106 (designation of general and special education
responsibilities for students with disabilities)
C.R.S. § 22-20-107.5 (district of residence for students with disabilities)
C.R.S. § 22-20-109 (tuition for special education services)
C.R.S. § 22-32-109 (1)(ll) (Board duty to adopt policies requiring enrollment
decisions to be made in a nondiscriminatory manner)
C.R.S. § 22-32-110 (1)(k) (protection against discrimination on racial or ethnic
background, includes hair)
C.R.S. § 22-32-110 (1)(m) (power to fix boundaries)
C.R.S. § 22-32-115 (2)(b) (open enrollment for Colorado residents)
C.R.S. § 22-32-116 (non-resident right to continue semester, if in 12th grade
may finish year, special rules for elementary students)
C.R.S. § 22-33-103 (resident right to attend district school)
C.R.S. § 22-33-106 (3) (grounds to deny admission)
C.R.S. § 22-36-101 (open enrollment policy must have time line and reasons
to deny enrollment)
1 CCR 301-8, Rules 4.03 and 8.07 (prohibiting administrative units from
inquiring about a transferring child´s IEP or disability status until after the
child has been admitted)
CROSS REF.: EEA, Student Transportation Services
JC, School Attendance Areas
JECC, School Assignment and School Choice
JECC-R, School Choice Procedure (Open Enrollment)
NOTE: Assignments to bilingual, ESL, Chapter 1, Special Education, and/or other
special programs are made through the procedures for those programs.
End of File: JECC