Boulder Valley School District
File: JECC
Adopted: January 10, 1991
Revised: January ___, 2024
ASSIGNMENT OF STUDENTS TO SCHOOLS
The Board of Education supports a variety of high quality educational programs. The Board’s
enrollment policies, including open enrollment, are intended to:
o Provide school stability
o Keep families together
o Enable employees to enroll their students as an employee benefit
o Honor neighborhood schools
o Serve School District families first
Students may attend their designated neighborhood school (based on home address), or their
parent/guardian may submit an application for open enrollment to another neighborhood school,
a focus school (meets BVSD standards but may have a different curriculum or philosophy), or a
charter school (an independent school within the School District).
Approval of open enrollment is based on available space, programming, and staffing at the
requested school. Some schools/grade levels may have no spaces to offer. When the number of
applicants exceeds the number of spaces available, students will be selected by a random
selection lottery.
Open enrollment requests granted will be approved for the duration of that school level
(elementary, middle level, or high school), and the selected school becomes the “school of
attendance” through the highest grade offered at the school. Students must reapply when
moving from one school level to the next, if still seeking assignment under open enrollment.
Other than as assigned through open enrollment, sStudents are expected to attend the
school which lies within the attendance area in which they live, with the following
exceptions:
1. If a school is overcrowded, students may be assigned to other schools where space
is available..
2. Principals may arrange for assignment of a student to a school other than the one in
his or her designated attendance area.
2. If needed to minimize disruption and provide appropriate working and learning
environments, the School District reserves the right to assign or re-assign students to
particular schools.
3. A parent/guardian may seek pPermission may be granted through an administrative
transfer for a student to enroll in a school outside his or her the student’s attendance
area or assigned school, but within the Boulder Valley School District, based upon
available space and in accordance with Board Policy.
3.
Whenever a student is assigned to a school outside his or her designated attendance area,
transportation shall be the responsibility of the parents, unless regular bus transportation
provided by the School District can bring the student within a reasonable distance of the
school to which he or she is transferring, and the bus is not already at capacity. The
exception shall be those students described in the first situation, above.
Requests granted will be approved for the duration of that school level (elementary,
middle level, or high school). Students must reapply, however, when moving from one
level to the next, if still seeking assignment under open enrollment.
Based upon projected growth and construction activity, Boulder Valley School District reserves
the right to retain space for projected student enrollment.
CROSS REF.: JC, School Attendance Areas
JECC, Assignment of Students to Schools
JECC-R, Open Enrollmen
EEA, Student Transportation Services
NOTE: Assignments to bilingual, ESL, Chapter 1, Special Education, and/or other
special programs are made through the procedures for those programs.
End of File: JECC
Page 1 of 1