SCHOOL CHOICE PROCEDURE ( OPEN ENROLLMENT)
The Board of Education supports a variety of high quality educational programs.
Students may attend their district designated neighborhood school (based on home
address), or application may be made for open enrollment to another neighborhood
school, a focus school (meets BVSD standards but may have a different curriculum or
philosophy), or a charter school (an independent school within the district) in our school
district. ¶
¶
GENERAL INFORMATION ¶
¶
1. Before completing the open enrollment process, parents/guardians should obtain
information about the school to which they are applying so that they are informed
about the program. Opportunities to visit and observe schools may be scheduled by
contacting individual school offices. ¶
¶
2. Approval of open enrollment is based on available space, programming, and staffing
at the requested school. Some schools/grade levels may have no spaces to offer.
When the number of applicants exceeds the number of spaces available, students
will be selected by a random selection lottery. ¶
¶
3. When a student has been enrolled in any school under the open enrollment policy,
that school becomes the “school of attendance” through the highest grade offered at
the school. To return to the district neighborhood school, an Open Enrollment
application must be submitted during the Open Enrollment period for the following
year. Approval will be granted if there is space available. ¶
¶
4. After open enrolling to an elementary, middle or K - 8 school, and completing the
highest grade in that school, students will attend their district designated
neighborhood school unless they open enroll to another middle or high school.
Students do not receive preference or assurance in applying for Open Enrollment to
the next level school in the feeder system. ¶
¶
5. Students who enroll in a school other than their district designated neighborhood
school are responsible for their own transportation. If space is available on an
Page 1 of 10
existing transportation route, parents/guardians may petition for “ridership” by
contacting the district’s ¶
Transportation Office at (720) 561 - 5120. This petition process occurs after the
school year begins. Parents/Guardians must petition every year for space available
ridership. ¶
¶
6. Misrepresentation of information will be grounds to invalidate an Open Enrollment
application.
OPEN ENROLLMENT P r ocess ROCESS AND and TI M ELINES Timelines
The School District will notify resident students and their parents/guardians on an
annual basis of the school choice options available through open enrollment in
sufficient time to apply. Notice will identify specific steps to apply for choice
enrollment and timelines that are enforceable, including :
● an application deadline no earlier than January 1
● a deadline of not more than ten (10) days for the parent/guardian to accept
and complete enrollment for awarded choice seats or the seat will be
forfeited
● an opportunity for any student who missed the application deadline to
submit an application prior to the last business day of August to add the
student’s name to the bottom of an established wait list. New residents of
the School District filing an initial application shall be added at the top of late
applications to on added to an established wait list.
● the ability of students to enroll to choice seats from wait lists to fill vacant
spots as available following the lottery through August, for some charter
schools until September 3, and for other charter schools on a space
available basis year round
To help families make decisions, the School District will make school choice and
enrollment data, including length of waitlists, as accessible as possible. ¶
Students with Disabilities ¶
¶
Students with an active Individual Education Plan (IEP) have the same opportunity to open
enroll as their typical peers. The open enrollment application does not request information
about disability status and admits all students through the lottery. Once a student has been
admitted and completes the online enrollment process, the School District will convene as
necessary an IEP team to determine whether the selected school can deliver a free
appropriate public education (FAPE). If the IEP team determines that FAPE is not available
in the school of choice, the School District will issue a prior written notice in accordance with
federal and state law. ¶
¶
Page 2 of 10
Athletic and Activities Eligibility ¶
¶
Students assigned to schools through choice will have the same curricular and extracurricular
status as all other students attending the school, as determined by applicable law, bylaws of the
Colorado High School Activities Association, and the School District´s eligibility requirements. ¶
Preschool
Due to complexities in Colorado law, preschool assignments in BVSD shall not be subject to open
enrollment procedures. ¶
Unless the parent/guardian promptly accepts the offer and completes
online enrollment (if necessary), the student forfeits the seat awarded
through the Open Enrollment process. ¶
¶
1. Parents/guardians must complete the application process no later than 4:00
p.m. on the day of the deadline stated on the School D d istrict website in
order to be included in the lottery selection process , Misrepresentation of
information will be grounds to invalidate an Open Enrollment application. ¶
¶
. 2. Parents/guardians must apply online. Parents who do not have online access are
encouraged to use c C omputers are available for this purpose at many schools,
and in the Open Enrollment office, during the window for open enrollment that will
be advertised on the district’s website . Only one application per child may be
submitted (multiple applications will be deleted) . ¶
3. The lottery process runs in two sequential stages and incorporates
preferences established in Board Policy and charter school
contracts following thepreferences established in this regulation : ¶
a. The first lottery will include s students who live inside School D d istrict
boundaries and students who live outside of the School D d istrict if they
have a sibling attending a BVSD school (as described in preference 2
below) or a parent employed by the School D d istrict (as described in
preference 3 below) . ¶
b. The second lottery will include s out - of - district students to fill any seats
available after the first lottery. ¶
9. 4. Notification of acceptance or waitlist status will be sent to the original pool of
timely applicants in the week following lottery completion. ¶
¶
10. 5. If a notification of acceptance is extended, parents/guardians who wish to accept
the seat have 10 calendar days from the emailed notice of acceptance to:
Page 3 of 10
c. a . Indicate their acceptance in the open enrollment online system ¶
¶
AND, for new students or those returning after a break in enrollment, ¶
¶
a. b. Complete the online enrollment process and provide any supporting
documents to the accepted school. Currently enrolled BVSD students will
have their information updated automatically. ¶
Unless the parent/guardian promptly accepts the offer and completes
online enrollment (if necessary), the student forfeits the seat awarded
through the Open Enrollment process. ¶
¶
11. 6. Parents/guardians who do not receive notification of lottery results, have 10 calendar
days to contact the Open Enrollment office. ¶
¶
12. 7. Once a student has been accepted to the first choice, whether the seat is
declined or not, the student will not be considered for lower choices in the open
enrollment process and will receive no further notifications. ¶
13. 8. Wait lists will be established from the applications received during the open
enrollment period. Students from the wait list will be emailed or called to fill verified
vacant spots, as available beginning in February through August.
Misrepresentation of information will be grounds to invalidate an Open Enrollment
application.
Note: The Open Enrollment cycle for Peak to Peak, Summit and Horizons is
active through the last day of September. ¶
INFORMATION REGARDING SPECIAL PROGRAMS ¶
¶
Students with Disabilities: Students with an active Individual Education Plan (IEP)
have the same opportunity to open enroll as their typical peers. The open enrollment
application does not request information about disability status and admits all
students through the lottery. Once a student has been admitted and completes the
online enrollment process, the School District will convene as necessary an IEP team
to determine whether the selected school can deliver a free appropriate public
education (FAPE). ¶
¶
Contact the Special Education department at (720) 561 - 5155 with questions. ¶
¶
ELD: Models for delivering English Language Development services vary by school.
Please contact the English Language Development department at (720) 561 - 5073 for
more information. ¶
Page 4 of 10
¶
Athletic and Activities Eligibility : Per the Colorado High School Athletics
Association guidelines, a student entering high school for the first time shall be
eligible for all interscholastic athletic competition. Students transferring schools after
entering high school without a qualifying move may jeopardize eligibility. ¶
¶
PRESCHOOL ¶
¶
Due to Colorado law, preschool in all BVSD schools will look different in 2023-2024. More
information will be available in January 2023. ¶
¶
D istrict and School Annual Enrollment ISTRICT AND SCHOOL LOTTERY SELECTION
PREFERENCES
For annual school assignment, students within designated attendance areas , including those
desiring to take classes on a part-time basis in accordance with Board Policy and those who
previously enrolled through school choice outside of their neighborhood school, will have priority
in registering in that neighborhood school. Students may apply for open enrollment in a school
outside their attendance area and will be admitted through an enrollment lottery incorporating the
preferences detailed below if there is space available in the requested school and program. If fewer
spaces are available than applications submitted, BVSD will conduct a lottery process in two sequential
stages: ¶
¶
2 The first lottery will includes students who live inside School Ddistrict boundaries and
students who live outside of the School Ddistrict if they fit within one of the top five
preferences below. ¶
The second lottery will includes out-of-district students to fill any seats available after the first lottery.
School District Preference s :
The open enrollment lottery process In the event a lottery is necessary for open
enrollment applications for any given school year, the lottery shall incorporate preferences as
follows:
These preferences apply to open enrollment applications except as otherwise noted
below. ¶
¶
1. In - district students who move out of their School D d istrict designated
neighborhood school attendance area but who remain in the School D d istrict and
wish to remain at the school the student is currently attending.
2. Sibling /Household preferences:
Page 5 of 10
a. A new student, whether they reside inside or outside of the district, whose
sibling /household member has been in attendance and will be attending the
requested school the following year.
b. A sibling / household member of a student accepting placement during the
same open enrollment period.
Note: When multiple siblings / household members apply for open
enrollment at the same school and in choice order, they will be linked as
siblings /household members in the lottery process.
3. A student of an eligible employee, whether they reside inside or outside of the
district. Eligible employees must be working for BVSD at the time of the application
and on the first day of the applicable school year. are those who are at the benefit
level for each of their respective employee groups, i.e. 20 hours per week or more
for classified and .50 FTE for licensed and professional/technical employees.
NOTE: If there is an enrollment opening at the time of employment, an
employee’s children may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space
available, the employee ’s enrollment preference will be applied will wait until in
the following school year or the next available space.
4. BVSD students wishing to return to their designated neighborhood school.
5. Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.
6. Current students who move outside the boundaries of BVSD and wish to remain
for a future school year in at the school the student is currently attending.
7. Students who reside outside the boundaries of BVSD.
School Preferences ¶
¶
In addition to the criteria listed above, some schools have additional preferences.
¶
Focus Schools ( B oulder Community School of Integrated Studies (BCSIS) , and High
Peaks: Community Montessori , High Peaks ) : ¶
¶
1. Sibling preferences as per the District’s selection process. ¶
¶
2. 1. Include a Family Income preference for This preference applies to in district
applicants who submit an optional current year economic survey as part of their open
enrollment application and qualify as low - income. Scholarships and transportation are
Page 6 of 10
provided for 20% of the qualifying Kindergarten - aged children who attend full - day
Kindergarten.
3. 2. After these preferences are met, the regular selection process will apply. ¶
Boulder Community School of Integrated Studies (BCSIS) and High Peaks: ¶
1. Sibling preferences as per the regular selection process.
2. 1. Family Income ¶
This preference applies to in district applicants who submit an
optional current year economic survey as part of their online open
enrollment application and , qualify as low - income, and reside within a 1 ½
mile walking distance of the Aurora 7 school site (refer to map BCSIS/High
Peaks ) until 20% of the qualifying entering Kindergarten - aged children are
enrolled. ¶
¶
3. 2. Geographic Area ¶
If 20% of the seats reserved for low - income students are not filled,
then students eligible for low - income status who reside south of Colorado
and west of Cherryvale Rd and east of 4th Ave. (refer to map BCSIS/High
Peaks ) until 20% of the low - income qualifying entering Kindergarten - aged
students are enrolled.
4. 3. After these preferences are met, the regular selection process will apply. ¶
Lafayette, Escuela Bilingüe Pioneer, Ryan, and Sanchez: When applying to Escuela
Bilingüe Pioneer or University Hill Dual Language, native English speaking students in grades
1st through 5th should have an educational background in a bilingual program and will be
assessed by the school to determine program appropriateness prior to final acceptance. ¶
¶
Note: Escuela Bilingüe Pioneer is a Focus School and follows focus school procedures
with the addition of the geographic preference below.
Focus Schools ( L afayette, Ryan, and Sanchez ) ¶
¶
Follow a Neighborhood Focus Schools follow the neighborhood preference before a
geographic preference that ¶
¶
1. Sibling preferences as per the regular selection process. ¶
¶
2. 1. Geographic Area ¶
This preference applies to applicants who reside inside the boundaries of any of the
Lafayette/Erie schools of BVSD; i.e. the attendance boundaries of each school in Lafayette.
Page 7 of 10
3. 2. After th is ese preference s are is met, the regular selection process will
apply. ¶
When applying to Escuela Bilingüe Pioneer or University Hill Dual Language, native
English speaking students in grades 1st through 5th should have an educational
background in a bilingual program and will be assessed by the school to determine
program appropriateness prior to final acceptance.
Charter School Preferences
BVSD intends for charter school admission criteria to be incorporated into charter contracts and not
revised annually. BVSD is committed to equitable criteria for open enrollment and the elimination
of special and legacy preferences for school founders and alumni, and for those who have applied
for admission previously. BVSD intends for charter school admission criteria to be incorporated into
charter contracts and not revised annually. The schools below will have their criteria reviewed in
the next charter school negotiation if they do not elect to adopt the School District’s preferences
earlier.
¶
Note: The Open Enrollment cycle for Peak to Peak, Summit and Horizons is active through
the last day of September. ¶
¶
Horizons K - 8 Charter:
1. Children of Faculty (licensed, non - temporary employee) employed in a licensed
Faculty position of 0.25 F.T.E. or greater, whether they reside inside or outside the
BVSD boundaries.
2. Sibling of a student who is attending and will be attending Horizons the following
year. - E QUAL preference with –
Children of Faculty employed in a licensed temporary full - time, temporary
part - time or temporary job - share Faculty position, with a one year contract of 0.25
F.T.E or greater (whether they reside inside or outside the BVSD boundaries).
3. Sibling of a student who is assigned in the current year.
4. Children of non - licensed staff in their 2 n d consecutive year, or subsequent, of
employment at 25% or greater (i.e., 10+ hours/week), whether they reside inside
or outside the BVSD boundaries.
5. Family Income Preference: In-district applicants who submit an optional current
year Family Economic Data Survey as part of their online open enrollment
Page 8 of 10
application and qualify as low income, until 25% of the total open enrollment slots
are filled with low-income students.
5. 6. Other community preferences as already stated in BVSD Policy JECC - R. ¶
NOTE: If there is an enrollment opening at the time of employment, a licensed
employee’s children may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space available, the
employee ’s enrollment preference will be applied will wait until in the following school
year or the next available space.
Preferences for Peak to Peak Charter:
(Preferences #1 through #5 are applicable whether a student resides inside or outside the
boundaries of BVSD.)
1. Children of teachers, administrators and counselors who are employed by Peak to
Peak. This preference excludes children of person(s) holding solely a substitute
position at Peak to Peak.
2. Children of staff other than teachers, administrators, and counselors, who are
employed at Peak to Peak for a minimum of 10 hours per week. This preference
excludes children of person(s) holding solely a substitute position at Peak to Peak.
Staff exercising this preference must remain in their positions through the end of
the school year in which the Open Enrollment application is completed.
3. Siblings of students attending Peak to Peak during the Open Enrollment application
period and will be attending Peak to Peak the next school year.
4. Siblings of students who are currently seniors during the open enrollment period.
5. Siblings of students who have been selected for admission into Peak to Peak.
6. Family income: This preference applies to in - district applicants who submit an optional
Family Economic Data Survey as part of their online open enrollment application and
qualify as low - income, until 20% of the qualifying entering K - 12 t h grade students are
enrolled.
6. 7. A resident student, who applies during the open - enrollment period, is placed on the
waiting list, is not offered admission before the next lottery period, and re - applies for
admission in the immediately successive open enrollment period.
7. 8. Alumni children: Children of resident parents/guardians who graduated
from Peak to Peak.
Page 9 of 10
8. 9. Students who live within the BVSD boundaries
9. 10. Students who live outside of BVSD boundaries who have previously applied to
Peak to Peak, are placed on the waiting list, is are not offered admission before the
next lottery period, and re - appl y ies for admission in the immediately successive
open enrollment period.
10. 11. Students who live outside the BVSD boundaries.
Preferences for Summit Charter:
1. Children of school organizers and of present and former Directors.
2. Children of Summit current teachers and staff residing in or out of District.
3. In District siblings of currently enrolled students and Summit graduates (completed
8th grade at Summit), including those accepted in the current lottery.
4. Family Income – This preference applies to in - district applicants for 6th grade who
submit an optional current year economic survey as part of their online open
enrollment application and qualify as low - income, until 10% of the qualifying
entering 6th grade students are enrolled.
5. In District with prior application (a student who was placed on the waitlist and
declined an opportunity to enroll at Summit is not eligible for this priority).
6. Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.
7. Out of District sibling of current Summit student or a former Summit graduate.
8. Out of district students.
End File: JECC - R
Page 10 of 10