Boulder Valley School District
File: JC
Adopted: February 26, 2019
Revised: _____________, 2024
School Attendance Areas
Attendance areas for each school of the School Ddistrict shall be drawn up by the administration
and approved by the Board, based on geography and student population projections.
A student's designated attendance area shall be based on the legal residence of the
parents/guardians. Where a property straddles a boundary line separating two schools, the
property shall be considered within the school boundary that contains the point where the
property driveway accesses the public right-of-way.
In establishing school boundaries, consideration shall be given to the compactness of the
boundaries, the densities of students in an area in relation to the relative capacities of the
schools, the equalization of enrollments between schools, the maximization of pedestrian
access to schools, and efficient use of transportation and facilities.
The Superintendent shall report annually to the Board on the status of the school attendance
areas.
Modification of attendance area boundaries may be made for a number of reasons, including
new property construction, the ability of schools to provide programs, making the best use of
instructional space, appropriate size of buildings and student population, amount of time on
buses (where applicable), and maximizing student walk potential while minimizing the impact
of hazards/barriers for walking students.
When it is determined that changes to boundaries are necessary, the following will apply:
Elementary, PK-8 and Middle Schools – Students who have a designated school change as
a result of a boundary adjustment and who would be completing the last grade level
available at their original school may continue to attend their original school for the final
year.
High Schools - Students in grades 9-12 who have a designated school change as a result
of a boundary adjustment may continue to attend their original school through
graduation.
Any changes to attendance boundaries shall only be implemented following completion of the
school year and prior to the opening of the subsequent school year.
LEGAL REF.: C.R.S. 22-32-110(1)(m) (power to fix attendance areas)
CROSS REF.: JFBAJECC, Intra-District Choice/Open Enrollment
End of File: JC
