Boulder Valley School
District File: JECC‐R
Revised: November 1, 2021, November 81, 2022, January ___, 2024
OPEN ENROLLMENT
The Board of Education supports a variety of high quality educational programs. Students may
attend their district designated neighborhood school (based on home address), or application may
be made for open enrollment to another neighborhood school, a focus school (meets BVSD
standards but may have a different curriculum or philosophy), or a charter school (an independent
school within the district) in our school district.
GENERAL INFORMATION
1. Before completing the open enrollment process, parents/guardians should obtain information
about the school to which they are applying so that they are informed about the program.
Opportunities to visit and observe schools may be scheduled by contacting individual school
offices.
2. Approval of open enrollment is based on available space, programming, and staffing at
the requested school. Some schools/grade levels may have no spaces to offer. When the
number of applicants exceeds the number of spaces available, students will be selected by a
random selection lottery.
3. When a student has been enrolled in any school under the open enrollment policy, that
school becomes the “school of attendance” through the highest grade offered at the school.
To return to the district neighborhood school, an Open Enrollment application must be
submitted during the Open Enrollment period for the following year. Approval will be
granted if there is space available.
4. After open enrolling to an elementary, middle or K‐8 school, and completing the highest
grade in that school, students will attend their district designated neighborhood school
unless they open enroll to another middle or high school. Students do not receive
preference or assurance in applying for Open Enrollment to the next level school in the
feeder system.
5. Students who enroll in a school other than their district designated neighborhood school
are responsible for their own transportation. If space is available on an existing transportation
route, parents/guardians may petition for “ridership” by contacting the district’s
Transportation Office at (720) 561‐5120. This petition process occurs after the school year
begins. Parents/Guardians must petition every year for space available ridership.
Page 1 of 8
6. Misrepresentation of information will be grounds to invalidate an Open Enrollment
application.
OPEN ENROLLMENT PROCESS AND TIMELINES
1. Parents/guardians must complete the application process no later than 4:00 p.m. on
the day of the deadline stated on the School Ddistrict website in order to be
included in the lottery selection process, Misrepresentation of information will be
grounds to invalidate an Open Enrollment application.
7.2. Parents/guardians must apply online. Parents who do not have online access are
encouraged to use cComputers are available for this purpose at many schools, and in the
Open Enrollment office, during the window for open enrollment that will be advertised on
the district’s website. Only one application per child may be submitted (multiple
applications will be deleted).
8.3. The lottery process runs in two sequential stages and incorporates
preferences established in Board Policy and charter school
contractsfollowing thepreferences established in this regulation:
a. The first lottery will includes students who live inside School Ddistrict boundaries
and students who live outside of the School Ddistrict if they have a sibling attending a
BVSD school (as described in preference 2 below) or a parent employed by the
School Ddistrict (as described in preference 3 below).
b. The second lottery will includes out‐of‐district students to fill any seats
available after the first lottery.
9.4. Notification of acceptance or waitlist status will be sent to the original pool of timely
applicants in the week following lottery completion.
10.5. If a notification of acceptance is extended, parents/guardians who wish to accept the
seat have 10 calendar days from the emailed notice of acceptance to:
c.a. Indicate their acceptance in the open enrollment online system
AND, for new students or those returning after a break in enrollment,
a.b. Complete the online enrollment process and provide any supporting documents to
the accepted school. Currently enrolled BVSD students will have their information
updated automatically.
Unless the parent/guardian promptly accepts the offer and completes online
enrollment (if necessary), the student forfeits the seat awarded through the Open
Enrollment process.
Page 2 of 8
11.6. Parents/guardians who do not receive notification of lottery results, have 10
calendar days to contact the Open Enrollment office.
12.7. Once a student has been accepted to the first choice, whether the seat is declined or
not, the student will not be considered for lower choices in the open enrollment process
and will receive no further notifications.
13.8. Wait lists will be established from the applications received during the open
enrollment period. Students from the wait list will be emailed or called to fill verified
vacant spots, as available beginning in February through August.
14.9. Any student who missed the OE deadline may submit an Open Enrollment application
prior to the last business day of August to add the student’s name to the bottom of an
established wait list.
Note: The Open Enrollment cycle for Peak to Peak, Summit and Horizons is active
through the last day of September.
INFORMATION REGARDING SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Students with Disabilities: Students with an active Individual Education Plan (IEP) have
the same opportunity to open enroll as their typical peers. The open enrollment application
does not request information about disability status and admits all students through the
lottery. Once a student has been admitted and completes the online enrollment process, the
School District will convene as necessary an IEP team to determine whether the selected
school can deliver a free appropriate public education (FAPE).
Contact the Special Education department at (720) 561‐5155 with questions.
ELD: Models for delivering English Language Development services vary by school.
Please contact the English Language Development department at (720) 561‐5073 for
more information.
Athletic and Activities Eligibility: Per the Colorado High School Athletics Association
guidelines, a student entering high school for the first time shall be eligible for all
interscholastic athletic competition. Students transferring schools after entering high school
without a qualifying move may jeopardize eligibility.
PRESCHOOL
Due to changes in Colorado law, preschool in all BVSD schools will look different in 2023-2024. More
information will be available in January 2023.
Page 3 of 8
DISTRICT AND SCHOOL LOTTERY SELECTION PREFERENCES
District Preferences:
These preferences apply to open enrollment applications except as otherwise noted below.
1. In‐district students who move out of their School Ddistrict designated neighborhood
school attendance area but who remain in the School Ddistrict and wish to remain at
the school the student is currently attending.
2. Sibling preferences:
a. A new student, whether they reside inside or outside of the district, whose
sibling has been in attendance and will be attending the requested school the
following year.
b. A sibling of a student accepting placement during the same open enrollment period.
Note: When multiple siblings apply for open enrollment at the same school and in
choice order, they will be linked as siblings in the lottery process.
3. A student of an eligible employee, whether they reside inside or outside of the district.
Eligible employees are those who are at the benefit level for each of their respective
employee groups, i.e. 20 hours per week or more for classified and .50 FTE for licensed
and professional/technical employees.
4. BVSD students wishing to return to their designated neighborhood school.
5. Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.
6. Current students who move outside the boundaries of BVSD and wish to remain at the
school the student is currently attending.
7. Students who reside outside the boundaries of BVSD.
Community Montessori:
1. Sibling preferences as per the District’s selection process.
2.1. Family Income
This preference applies to in district applicants who submit an optional current year
economic survey as part of their open enrollment application and qualify as low‐
income. Scholarships and transportation are provided for 20% of the qualifying
Kindergarten‐aged children who attend full‐day Kindergarten.
3.2. After these preferences are met, the regular selection process will apply.
Page 4 of 8
Boulder Community School of Integrated Studies (BCSIS) and High Peaks:
1. Sibling preferences as per the regular selection process.
2.1. Family Income
This preference applies to in district applicants who submit an optional current year
economic survey as part of their online open enrollment application and, qualify as
low‐ income, and reside within a 1 ½ mile walking distance of the Aurora 7 school
site (refer to map BCSIS/High Peaks) until 20% of the qualifying entering
Kindergarten‐ aged children are enrolled.
3.2. Geographic Area
If 20% of the seats reserved for low‐income students are not filled, then students
eligible for low‐income status who reside south of Colorado and west of Cherryvale
Rd and east of 4th Ave. (refer to map BCSIS/High Peaks) until 20% of the low‐
income qualifying entering Kindergarten‐aged students are enrolled.
4.3. After these preferences are met, the regular selection process will apply.
Lafayette, Escuela Bilingüe Pioneer, Ryan, and Sanchez:
Note: Escuela Bilingüe Pioneer is a Focus School and follows focus school procedures with the
addition of the geographic preference below. Lafayette, Ryan, and Sanchez are Neighborhood Focus
Schools and follow the neighborhood preference before the geographic preference:
1. Sibling preferences as per the regular selection process.
2.1. Geographic Area
This preference applies to applicants who reside inside the boundaries of any of
the Lafayette/Erie schools of BVSD; i.e. the attendance boundaries of each school
in Lafayette.
3.2. After thisese preferences are is met, the regular selection process will apply.
When applying to Escuela Bilingüe Pioneer or University Hill Dual Language, native English
speaking students in grades 1st through 5th should have an educational background in a bilingual
program and will be assessed by the school to determine program appropriateness prior to final
acceptance.
Charter Schools:
BVSD intends for charter school admission criteria to be incorporated into charter contracts and
not revised annually. BVSD is committed to equitable criteria for open enrollment and the
elimination of legacy preferences for school founders and alumni, and for those who have applied
Page 5 of 8
for admission previously.
Horizons K‐8 Charter:
1. Children of Faculty (licensed, non‐temporary employee) employed in a licensed Faculty
position of 0.25 F.T.E. or greater, whether they reside inside or outside the BVSD
boundaries.
2. Sibling of a student who is attending and will be attending Horizons the following year.
‐EQUAL preference with –
Children of Faculty employed in a licensed temporary full‐time, temporary part‐time or
temporary job‐share Faculty position, with a one year contract of 0.25 F.T.E or greater
(whether they reside inside or outside the BVSD boundaries).
3. Sibling of a student who is assigned in the current year.
4. Children of non‐licensed staff in their 2nd consecutive year, or subsequent, of employment
at 25% or greater (i.e., 10+ hours/week), whether they reside inside or outside the BVSD
boundaries.
5. Family Income Preference: In-district applicants who submit an optional current year Family
Economic Data Survey as part of their online open enrollment application and qualify as low-
income, until 25% of the total open enrollment slots are filled with low-income students.
5.6. Other community preferences as already stated in BVSD Policy JECC‐R.
NOTE: If there is an enrollment opening at the time of employment, a licensed employee’s children
may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space available, the employee’s enrollment preference
will be applied will wait until in the following school year or the next available space.
Preferences for Peak to Peak Charter:
(Preferences #1 through #5 are applicable whether a student resides inside or outside the boundaries
of BVSD.)
1. Children of teachers, administrators and counselors who are employed by Peak to
Peak. This preference excludes children of person(s) holding solely a substitute
position at Peak to Peak.
2. Children of staff other than teachers, administrators, and counselors, who are employed at
Peak to Peak for a minimum of 10 hours per week. This preference excludes children of
person(s) holding solely a substitute position at Peak to Peak. Staff exercising this preference
must remain in their positions through the end of the school year in which the Open
Enrollment application is completed.
3. Siblings of students attending Peak to Peak during the Open Enrollment application period
Page 6 of 8
and will be attending Peak to Peak the next school year.
4. Siblings of students who are currently seniors during the open enrollment period.
5. Siblings of students who have been selected for admission into Peak to Peak.
6. Family income: This preference applies to in‐district applicants who submit an optional
Family Economic Data Survey as part of their online open enrollment application and qualify
as low‐income, until 20% of the qualifying entering K‐12th grade students are enrolled.
6.7. A resident student, who applies during the open‐enrollment period, is placed on the waiting
list, is not offered admission before the next lottery period, and re‐applies for admission in
the immediately successive open enrollment period.
7.8. Alumni children: Children of resident parents/guardians who graduated from Peak to Peak.
8.9. Students who live within the BVSD boundaries
9.10. Students who live outside of BVSD boundaries who have previously applied to Peak to
Peak, are placed on the waiting list, is are not offered admission before the next lottery
period, and re‐applyies for admission in the immediately successive open enrollment period.
10.11. Students who live outside the BVSD boundaries.
Preferences for Summit Charter:
1. Children of school organizers and of present and former Directors.
2. Children of Summit current teachers and staff residing in or out of District.
3. In District siblings of currently enrolled students and Summit graduates (completed 8th
grade at Summit), including those accepted in the current lottery.
4. Family Income – This preference applies to in‐district applicants for 6th grade who submit an
optional current year economic survey as part of their online open enrollment application and
qualify as low‐income, until 10% of the qualifying entering 6th grade students are enrolled.
5. In District with prior application (a student who was placed on the waitlist and declined an
opportunity to enroll at Summit is not eligible for this priority).
6. Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.
7. Out of District sibling of current Summit student or a former Summit graduate.
8. Out of district students.
Page 7 of 8
End File: JECC‐R
Page 8 of 8