Boulder Valley School District
File: JECC‐R
Revised: November 9, 2018, November 1, 2021, November 8, 2022,
February 27, 2024, September __, 2024
SCHOOL CHOICE PROCEDURE (OPEN ENROLLMENT)
Process and Timelines
The School District will notify resident students and their parents/guardians on an annual
basis of the school choice options available through open enrollment in sufficient time to
apply. Notice will identify specific steps to apply for choice enrollment and timelines that
are enforceable, including:
● an application deadline no earlier than January 1
● a deadline of not more than ten (10) days for the parent/guardian to accept and complete
enrollment for awarded choice seats or the seat will be forfeited
● an opportunity for any student who missed the application deadline to submit an
application prior to the last business day of August to add the student’s name to the
bottom of an established wait list. New residents of the School District filing an initial
application shall be added at the top of late applications added to an established wait list.
● the ability of students to enroll to choice seats from wait lists to fill vacant spots as
available following the lottery through August, for some charter schools until September
30, and for other charter schools on a space available basis year round
To help families make decisions, the School District will make school choice and enrollment
data, including length of waitlists, as accessible as possible.
Preschool
Due to complexities in Colorado law, preschool assignments in BVSD shall not be subject to
open enrollment procedures and shall not impact students’ school assignments for
kindergarten.
District and School Annual Enrollment
For annual school assignment, students within designated attendance areas will have priority
in registering in that neighborhood school. Students may apply for open enrollment in a school
outside their attendance area and will be admitted if there is space available in the requested
school and program.
1
School District Preferences
The lottery shall incorporate preferences as follows:
1. BVSD students wishing to return from a choice school to their designated neighborhood
school for the next school year.
2. In-district students who move out of their School District designated neighborhood
school attendance area but who remain in the School District and wish to remain at the
school the student is currently attending.
3. Sibling/Household preferences:
a. A new student, whether they reside inside or outside of the district, whose
sibling/household member has been in attendance and will be attending the
requested school the following year.
b. A sibling/household member of a student accepting placement during the same
open enrollment period.
Note: When multiple siblings/household members apply for open enrollment at the same
school and in choice order, they will be linked as siblings/household members in the
lottery process.
4. A student of an eligible employee, whether they reside inside or outside of the district.
Eligible employees must be working for BVSD at the time of the application and on the
first day of the applicable school year.
Note: If there is an enrollment opening at the time of employment, an employee’s
children may be enrolled immediately. If there is no space available, the employee’s
enrollment preference will be applied in the following school year or the next available
space.
5. Students who reside within the boundaries of BVSD.
6. Current students who move outside the boundaries of BVSD and wish to remain for a
future school year in the BVSD school the student is currently attending.
7. Students who reside outside of the boundaries of BVSD and have a grandparent that
resides within BVSD.
8. Students of individuals who reside outside of and work within the boundaries of the
Boulder Valley School District, including Boulder, Broomfield, and Gilpin counties.
Eligible individuals must be working within the boundaries of BVSD at the time of the
application and on the first day of the applicable school year.
7.9. Students who reside outside the boundaries of BVSD and are not currently attending
2
a BVSD school.
Bilingual/Dual Language Programs
When applying to Bilingual and Dual Language Programs, native English speaking students in
grades 1st through 5th should have an educational background in a bilingual program and will
be assessed by the school to determine program appropriateness prior to final acceptance.
Charter Schools
BVSD is committed to equitable criteria for open enrollment to all BVSD schools, and the
elimination of special and legacy preferences for school founders and alumni, and for those
who have applied for admission previously. BVSD intends for charter school enrollment
preference criteria to be incorporated into charter contracts and not revised annually. To the
extent a charter contract authorizes preference criteria that differ from BVSD’s criteria, the
charter school’s criteria would apply in the lottery process. Charter schools are authorized to
make nondiscriminatory decisions about their own enrollment in accordance with their charter
contract and applicable policies.
End File: JECC-R
3