Student-Based Resource
Allocations
A Memorandum of Understanding between the Board of Education and the
Boulder Valley Education Association
Purpose
The purpose of this MOU is to establish the parameters of an ongoing work
group charged with using professional judgment and research/experts to
facilitate as needed, in order to determine appropriately differentiated student ­
based allocations of school resources in BVSD; to ensure that all schools have
an equitable playing field, and make recommendations for the allocation of
resources based on the diverse needs of students, classrooms, schools, and
communities across BVSD. This work will support the BVSD Vision, Mission,
Values Goals and the BVSD Strategic Plan.
Executive Summary
This MOU was developed during Consensus Based Bargaining in 2014. It
results from a survey of hundreds of BVSD educators across the District who
expressed strong interest in developing a weighted student allocation method
that would effectively provide differentiated support to address the needs of all
students and communities across BVSD.
Student Based Resource Allocations MOU Final Report
Summary of Committee Work
● Met for 36 hours from fall 2015 through fall 2016
● Created vision and mission statements
● Learned about school finance and BVSD funding formulas
● Conducted extensive research on differentiated school funding models
● Aligned information with the Success Effect
● Established funding priorities
● Created funding recommendations
● Attained consensus on funding recommendations
Recommendations
Further funding available beyond what is necessary to maintain current levels of services,
including maintaining the current staffing ratios, shall be allocated:
1. Up to the first $1.5 million will be divided among schools based on the number of
students with a Free and Reduced Lunch designation.
2. Funds beyond the initial $1.5 million and up to an additional $1.5 million will be divided
among schools based on the number of students with a Special Education designation.
3. Funds beyond the initial $3 million and up to an additional $1.5 million will be divided
among schools based on the number of students with an English Language Developing
designation.
Implementation Guidelines
● Resources are allocated to schools annually in the form of Regular Ed Teacher FTE based
on the prior year’s October Count data.
● Existing parameters for FTE conversions apply in the use of these additional funds.
● While this child-centered funding model is intended to support students in specific
categories, the outcome of strategies implemented may, as a secondary effect, benefit
the entire school population.
● Use of additional resources will be determined through shared decision making and
aligned with the strategies developed collaboratively as part of the UIP, therefore
accountability measures for use of these funds are embedded within the UIP.
Conclusion
Our vision is to create a culture where parents, teachers, staff, students,
administrators, and community members will embrace all of BVSD as
one community. The positive feelings people have for their school will
extend to our district as a whole. We believe that all students should be
allocated the appropriate resources to meet their diverse needs so that
they can access the curriculum and learn through highly effective
instruction. The overall goal is to further student success, with the
intention of making them lifelong learners.