Student Based Resource Allocations MOU
Final Report
November 2016
Executive Summary:
This MOU was developed during Consensus Based Bargaining in 2014. It results from a
survey of hundreds of BVSD educators across the district who expressed strong interest
in developing a weighted student allocation method that would effectively provide
differentiated support to address the needs of all students and communities across
​ ​ ​ ​
BVSD.
MOU:
The purpose of this MOU is to establish the parameters of an ongoing work group charged with
using professional judgment and research/experts to facilitate as needed, in order to determine
appropriately differentiated student based allocations of school resources in BVSD; to ensure
​
that all schools have an equitable playing field, and make recommendations for the allocation of
resources based on the diverse needs of students, classrooms, schools, and communities
across BVSD. This work will support the BVSD Vision, Mission, Values Goals and the BVSD
Strategic Plan.
Membership:
● Co-chairs: Nancy Piercy (Centaurus, SPED) / Lori Hattendorf (Bear Creek, 2nd grade) and Robbyn
​
Fernandez (Executive Director for Elementary School Leadership)
● General Educators:
​
Dan Laman (Centennial LA)
Lori Hattendorf (Bear Creek, 2nd grade)
Tina Mueh (BVEA President)
● Specialists:
​
Alysia Hayas (Whittier, ELD/IB)
Jacy Bruno (Mesa, PE)
Beth Bogner (Centaurus, Reading)
Carolyn Sclar (MK-8 Music)
● Building Administrators:
​
Lora de la Cruz (Sánchez, Principal)
Justin McMillan (Casey, Principal)
Greg Guevara (Nederland, Assistant Principal)
Don Stensrud (Fairview, Principal)
● Special Educators:
​
Sally Lopez (Aspen Creek, Resource)
Sarah Hultgren (Manhattan, Resource)
Stephen Solis (Boulder HS, ICAN)
● District Administrators:
​
Dennis Rastatter (SPED)
Steve Landrigan (HR)
Bill Sutter (Business Services)
Chris Wilderman (Custodians, Operations, Security)
Cynthia Trinidad-Sheehan (ELD)
● Parents:
​
Andrea Ritzer (parent-Boulder)
Kathleen Marr (parent-Lafayette)
Summary of Committee Work:
The Student Based Resource Allocations MOU committee met for 36 hours in half-day and
full-day meetings for a period of over one year in order to arrive at the recommendations
listed below. The committee began its work by creating vision and mission statements which
served as guiding documents throughout the process. In addition, Bill Sutter (BVSD CFO),
Gillian Luis (BVSD Budget Analyst), and Tracey Rainey (Colorado School Finance Project
Director) presented information to the group on how schools in general are funded, BVSD
school funding formulas, and differentiated school funding models. This provided baseline
information for the committee and served as a springboard for the extensive process that the
committee subsequently engaged in involving research of weighted student allocation
models across the U.S.
The next step of the process was to look at the body of information and consider how the
creation of funding priorities could and should align with the Success Effect and specifically,
Multi-Tiered Systems of Support. Based on both research of funding models and
mathematical calculation models using BVSD schools, the group determined that available
funds (beyond current school FTE allocations) should be prioritized in the following way:
1. Students in poverty;
2. Students on IEPs;
3. Students who are learning English.
It is the belief of the Student Based Resource Allocations MOU committee that the allocation
of resources to schools based on these priorities will provide schools with additional
resources needed to improve outcomes for our most at-risk students while maintaining
current levels of funding that support all students in BVSD. The group completed a
consensus decision-making process, achieving consensus on the recommendation statement
and implementation guidelines below.
Guiding Principles:
Vision:
​
Our vision is to create a culture where parents, teachers, staff, students, administrators, and
community members will embrace all of BVSD as one community. The positive feelings people
have for their school will extend to our district as a whole. We believe that all students should
be allocated the appropriate resources to meet their diverse needs so that they can access the
curriculum and learn through highly effective instruction. The overall goal is to further student
success, with the intention of making them lifelong learners.
Mission:
​
Our mission is to create a system that would be sustainable, fiscally possible, transparent,
flexible, manageable and research-based. We will complete an analysis of our current
allocation model and identify any areas that are not aligned with our BVSD Vision, Mission,
Values and Goals in the Strategic Plan. With an understanding that equitable is not the same
as equal, we will identify inequity that exists in our district; we will make suggestions for
correcting any misalignments; while avoiding incentivizing the unnecessary labeling of students,
we will create a research-based, basic student allocation framework to support an equitable
playing field.
Student Based Resource Allocations MOU Committee Recommendations and
Implementation Guidelines:
Recommendation:
​
Further funding available beyond what is necessary to maintain current levels of
services, including maintaining the current staffing ratios, shall be allocated:
1. Up to the first $1.5M will be divided among schools based on the
number of students with a FRL designation.
2. Funds beyond the initial $1.5M and up to an additional $1.5M will be
divided among schools based on the number of students with a
SPED designation.
3. Funds beyond the initial $3M and up to an additional $1.5M will be
divided among schools based on the number of students with an
ELD designation.
Implementation Guidelines:
The allocation of these additional resources in the form of “Teacher FTE” is intended to allow for
flexibility of program design and implementation. It is understood that the conversion between
position types may result in budget dollars shifting between major programmatic areas as
annual decisions are made regarding the use of targeted resources.
● Resources are allocated to schools annually in the form of Regular Ed Teacher
FTE based on the prior year’s October Count data.
● Existing parameters for FTE conversions apply in the use of these additional
funds.
● While this child-centered funding model is intended to support students in
specific categories, the outcome of strategies implemented may, as a secondary
effect, benefit the entire school population.
● Use of additional resources will be determined through shared decision making
and aligned with the strategies developed collaboratively as part of the UIP,
therefore accountability measures for use of these funds are embedded within the
UIP.
Further Considerations:
● Minimize barriers for families to receive FRL status and services.
● To improve efficiencies and increase understanding and trust, promote
transparency and information sharing about the allocation and use of resources in
schools.