
===== page 1 =====
AGREEMENT
Between
THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
and the
EMPLOYEES REPRESENTED BY
THE BOULDER VALLEY EDUCATION ASSOCIATION
of the
BOULDER VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT RE2J
EFFECTIVE DATES:
August 1, 2026 – July 31, 2029
===== page 2 =====
This page is intentionally left blank
===== page 3 =====
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1 Adherence to Agreement 2
2 School Board Responsibilities 2
3 Effect of Agreement 2
4 Savings Clause 3
5 Definitions 3
5.4 Seniority 3
6 Recognition 4
7 Labor Management Team 4
8 Election Procedures 4
SECTION B: NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURE
1 Scope 4
2 Representation and Logistics of Negotiations 5
3 Initiation 5
4 Procedures 5
5 Meetings 5
6 Procedure for Impasse 6
7 Adoption and Ratification of Agreement 7
8 Interim Negotiations 8
SECTION C: DUTIES OF THE EMPLOYEE
1 Professional Duties 8
2 Board Policies 9
3 Contract Year 9
4 School Calendar 10
5 Employee Hours and Work Load 10
6 Elementary Class Size 12
7 Secondary Student Load 13
8 Grade Reporting Deadlines 13
9 Paraeducators 14
10 Department Chairpersons and Team Leaders 14
11 Staff Meetings 14
===== page 4 =====
12 Additional Requirements: Pre-School Sessions 14
13 Classroom Coverage 15
14 Student Discipline 15
15 Use of Physical Intervention 15
16 Legal Counsel 16
17 Transportation of Students 16
18 Assignment of Specialists 16
19 Staffing 19
20 Assessment 19
21 English as a Second Language 20
22 Opening, Closing, and Reorganizing Schools 20
23 Assessment (electronic) 20
24 Technology 20
25 Special Education (504) 20
26 Property Protection/Employee Responsibility for Funds 21
27 Nonprofessional Duties 21
28 Staff Feedback of Building Administration 22
29 Civility 22
SECTION D: EMPLOYMENT
1 Non-Discrimination 23
2 Health Examination 23
3 Probation 23
4 Employment Status 23
5 Evaluation Purposes 23
6 Evaluation Sequence 24
7 Probationary Employees 24
8 Non-Probationary Employees: Level I 26
9 Non-Probationary Employees: Level II 28
9.6 General Provisions 30
10 Public Complaints 32
11 Just Cause 32
12 Employee Assignments 32
13 Personal and Professional Growth 33
14 Transfer 33
15 Notification of Vacancies 33
16 Filling Vacancies 34
===== page 5 =====
17 Voluntary Transfers 34
18 Administrative Transfers 34
19 Involuntary Transfers 35
20 Reduction in Force 38
21 Qualifications 40
22 Substitutes 40
23 Student Teachers 40
24 Administrative Positions 41
25 Learning Materials 41
26 Curriculum Development 41
27 Performance Contracting 41
28 Salary Notification and Changes 41
29 Employee Exchange 41
30 Limited Term/Temporary Contract 42
SECTION E: COMPENSATION
1 Compensation Rate 43
2 Pay Periods 44
3 Mileage 44
4 Classroom Coverage 44
5 Credit Hours 44
6 Curriculum Development 44
7 Professional Development Rate 44
8 National Board Certification 44
9 Teacher Librarians 45
10 Counselors 45
11 Extra Pay for Extra Duty 45
12 Department Chairperson and Outdoor Education 49
13 Qualifications and Requirements of Vocational-
Technical Salary Schedule 49
14 Group Insurance: Medical, Dental and Life Insurance 50
15 Long Term Disability Insurance 51
16 Plan Contents 51
17 Workers Compensation & Employers Liability Insurance 51
18 Benefits Committee 51
19 PERA & Workers Compensation 51
20 Annual Leave 51
===== page 6 =====
20.11 Religious Holiday Leave 53
21 Sick Leave Bank 53
22 Injury Leave 55
23 Bereavement Leave 56
24 Time Off to Vote 56
25 Jury Duty 56
26 Court Appearances 56
27 Military Leave 57
28 Return Right - Replacement 57
29 Notification 57
30 Leave of Absence for Improvement of Health 57
31 Leave for Governmental Service 58
32 Family Medical Leave Act 58
33 Extended Absences for Personal Reasons 58
34 Leave for Professional Study 59
35 Career and Technical Education Proficiency Leave 60
36 Military Leave for Active Service 61
37 Leave Rights 61
38 Tuition Reimbursement 61
39 Program Development 62
40 Change of Pay Status 63
41 Voluntary Reduction 64
42 Job Shares 64
43 BVSD/BVEA 110 Plan 65
SECTION F: PRIVILEGES & FACILITIES
1 Association President/Vice President Salary 65
2 Use of Facilities 66
3 Board Meeting Information 66
4 Professional Leave for Association Business 67
5 Payroll Deduction 67
6 Visiting Schools 68
7 Building Meetings 68
8 District Information 68
9 Employee Files 68
10 Employees’ Facilities 68
11 Salary Letter 69
===== page 7 =====
12 Leave Accounting 69
13 Children of Employee 70
SECTION G: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
1 Definitions 70
2 Purpose 70
3 Procedure 70
4 Informal Conference 72
5 Level One 72
6 Level Two 72
7 Level Three 73
8 Level Four 73
SECTION H: ADVISORY COUNCILS
1 Teachers’ Advisory Council (TAC) 74
2 Special Education Advisory Council (SPAC) 75
3 Counselor District Advisory Council (CDAC) 76
4 Dual Language Advisory Council (DLAC) 77
5 Hours worked outside Contract Day 78
SECTION I: PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
1 Faculty Advisory Committee 78
2 Building and Remodeling Plan 78
3 School Visitation 78
4 Other Matters 78
5 Professional Development 79
6 Professional Relationships 79
SECTION J: FUTURE CONFERENCE AND TERM
1 Term of Agreement 80
2 Termination of Agreement 80
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOUs) 82
Time Appendix Matrix 123
===== page 8 =====
This page is intentionally left blank
===== page 9 =====
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION AND THE EMPLOYEES
Represented by the
BOULDER VALLEY EDUCATION ASSOCIATION
of the
BOULDER VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT
PREAMBLE
Boulder Valley Education Association recognizes the development and attainment of a quality
education is a collaborative responsibility and requires mutual understanding and cooperation
among the Boulder Valley School District Board of Education, the District Administration and
the Association. The heart of this agreement is centered on reciprocal support and communication.
When teachers feel supported and are engaged, the students we teach will be more successful.
Furthermore, we believe that each student is a unique individual who needs a secure, caring, and
stimulating atmosphere in which they mature emotionally, intellectually, physically and socially
and where they have the opportunity to achieve and succeed academically.
We know that students are more successful when they see themselves at the front of their
classroom. Teachers in Boulder Valley School District will provide culturally responsive teaching
and honor the dignity of their students, and therefore, it is our goal to promote the hiring and
retaining of teachers of color who represent the students they teach.
BVEA, the Board of Education and BVSD have the responsibility to uphold and honor this
bargaining agreement. By doing so, the students of BVSD will have equitable access to their
education which will generate opportunity.
SECTION A: GENERAL PROVISION
A-1 ADHERENCE TO AGREEMENT: Both parties agree that during the term of this
Agreement, adherence to the provisions contained herein will be an obligation and duty of
each. There will be no strikes or other individual or concerted action designated to deprive
the youth in the schools of services of Unit B employees. Any employee who engages in
such actions during the term of this Agreement shall be subject to severe disciplinary
action. Such disciplinary action shall be subject to the Grievance Procedure contained in
this Agreement, except where applicable the state statute will apply. The Board of
Education further agrees that it will not, during the term of the Agreement, officially adopt
or implement any condition of employment contrary to the provisions of this Agreement.
A-2 SCHOOL BOARD RESPONSIBILITIES: Except as expressly provided in this
Agreement, the determination and administration of school policy, the determination of
school curriculum, the operation and management of the schools, the direction of
employees are vested exclusively in the Board of Education.
A-3 EFFECT OF AGREEMENT: The parties mutually agree that the terms and conditions set
2
===== page 10 =====
forth in this Agreement represent the full and complete understanding and commitment as of August
1, 2026, between the parties hereto which may be altered, changed, added to, deleted from, or
modified only through voluntary, mutual consent of the parties in an amendment hereto.
A-3.1 Should any part of this Agreement be declared illegal by a court of competent
jurisdiction it shall be automatically deleted from this Agreement to the extent
that it violates the law, but the remaining portion shall remain in full force and
effect for the duration of the Agreement to the extent it is not affected by the
deleted portion.
A-4 SAVINGS CLAUSE: In the adoption of the Agreement, the parties agree that nothing
contained herein is intended to be construed to delegate or limit the powers, duties,
discretions, and responsibilities of the Board of Education as prescribed by the
Constitution and Laws of the State of Colorado. If any provision of this Agreement, or any
application of the Agreement shall be found contrary to law, such provision or application
shall have effect only to the extent permitted by law.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny or restrict any rights an employee may
have under the laws and Constitution of the State of Colorado and the United States.
A-5 DEFINITIONS: “Employee” shall mean for the purpose of this Agreement a person who
is a member of Unit B. Unit B shall consist of licensed and/or credentialed teachers, teacher
librarians audiologists, occupational therapists, physical therapists, behavior analysts,
counselors, psychologists, speech and language specialists, and social workers who are
employed in such capacity on at least a half-time contract.
A-5.1 “Probationary employee” means an employee who has not completed three full
years of continuous employment and who has not been reemployed for the fourth
year as provided under the provisions of the Teacher Employment,
Compensation and Dismissal Act.
A-5.2 “Teacher” means any person who holds a teacher’s license and is employed under
the provisions of the Teacher Employment, Compensation and Dismissal Act.
A-5.3 “Part-time Teacher” means a teacher who is employed on less than a half-time
contract.
A-5.4 SENIORITY: Seniority shall be established subject to the following
conditions:
a. An employee’s seniority date shall be defined as the first day an employee
worked under his/her/their most recent contract.
b. An employee maintains his/her/their seniority rights while on an approved
leave of absence.
c. Once a probationary employee receives a regular contract, that employee’s
seniority shall originate from the date the employee first reported to work,
including the time on a limited term or temporary contract, provided service
3
===== page 11 =====
has not been interrupted for more than thirty (30) work days and the
employee has been employed for at least a .50 FTE contract.
d. An employee will not earn seniority credit for the school year in which their
overall summative performance evaluation rates the employee as
ineffective.
In the event two or more employees have the same seniority date, the date their
most recent contract was signed shall govern. Contracts not dated by the
employee shall originate from the date the employee first reported for work. If
two or more employees still have the same seniority date, seniority will be
established by lot.
A seniority list shall be completed by December 31 of the school year. A copy of
such list shall be provided to each building in the District and the Association.
Annual updating of such list shall be the responsibility of the Human Resources
Division.
A-5.5 For the purposes of this Agreement, those employees assigned to the middle schools
are considered to be assigned to secondary schools.
A-6 RECOGNITION: Members of Unit B have the right to elect an organization to represent
them in negotiations with the Board of Education on matters pertaining to salaries, hours,
terms and conditions of employment, processing of alleged grievances, and on matters
which both parties agree are proper subjects for negotiations.
A-6.1 The Board of Education hereby reaffirms recognition of the Boulder Valley
Education Association as the exclusive representative of the members of Unit B
for the effective dates of this Agreement and for such additional periods of time
as its recognition may be extended under the policies and procedures of the Board
of Education. All rights and privileges granted the Association under the terms
and provisions of this Agreement are for the exclusive use of the Association.
A-7 A Labor/Management Team, consisting of the BVEA President, Vice President, and
UniServ Director and the BVSD Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent of Human
Resources, and another BVSD administrator designated by the Superintendent, will meet
regularly to discuss and resolve issues that exceed the scope of weekly BVEA/HR
meetings. The Labor/Management Team will also consider proposals from various
collaborative BVEA/BVSD groups about changes to policy or practice and will
recommend to BVEA and BVSD appropriate actions.
A-8 ELECTION PROCEDURES: The election procedures of the Board of Education for the
purpose of determining the appropriate representative of Unit B and other units is stated in
Board policy HG.
SECTION B: NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURE
B-1 SCOPE: The Board of Education, the Superintendent, or their designees, will meet with
4
===== page 12 =====
Unit B representatives to negotiate and reach agreements on matters pertaining to salaries,
hours, terms and conditions of employment, procedures for the processing of alleged
grievances, and on other matters which both parties agree are proper subjects for
negotiations.
B-1.1 BVEA and the District agree that consensus bargaining is the agreed upon model
for negotiations.
B-2 REPRESENTATION AND LOGISTICS OF NEGOTIATIONS: At the time of request
for negotiations, the initiating party shall identify not more than eight (8) persons who shall
negotiate pursuant to the provisions of the Agreement. When responding to such a request
the recipient shall also identify not more than eight (8) representatives. Either party may,
if it so desires, use the services of outside consultants and may call up on proper
representatives to participate in negotiations. When such meetings are held during school
time, a maximum of five (5) Association negotiators shall receive pay from the District for
such time lost. Other Association negotiators’ time will be charged against BVEA days.
B-2.1 Both parties shall negotiate in good faith and in a timely fashion.
B-3 INITIATION: A written request for negotiations shall be submitted by the party(ies)
st
desiring negotiations no later than the 1 day of January.
B-3.1 Within ten (10) working days following the receipt of request for negotiations, the
recipients shall make written acknowledgement of the request.
B-4 PROCEDURES: The parties will meet to present proposals for negotiations no later than
February 1st.
B-5 MEETINGS: Whenever the district anticipates that a meeting involving BVEA
representatives will be subject to the open meetings law, the district will convene a meeting
of the Labor/Management Committee and discuss the posting of the proposed meeting, the
role of the public participants at the proposed meeting, if any, and such other norms and
expectations as may be necessary to ensure that a professional and productive,
collaborative environment is maintained.
B-5.1 During negotiations the issue for change of either party may be modified or added
to. Those sections of the Agreement which had no proposal for change by either
party may also be deleted or modified.
B-5.2 During negotiations, unilateral communications from the Board or administrators
to Unit B members or from Unit B members to the Board or administration shall
be limited to matters concerning normal conduct of District affairs. This does not
preclude bilateral communication between Board members, District
administrators and Association leadership on matters under negotiations.
B-5.3 The above stated procedures do not prohibit additional negotiations when the two
parties mutually agree.
5
===== page 13 =====
B-5.4 Tentative agreements reached during negotiations, including mediation or fact-
finding, shall be reduced to writing, dated and initialed by both parties.
Agreement on any matter in negotiations is reached only when the parties have
tentative agreement on all matters in negotiations, subject to ratification by both
parties.
B-5.5 Association requests for records, lists, or other data should be addressed to the
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources with a copy to the Superintendent.
Association requests will be limited to the President of BVEA, the UniServ
Director, and the Chairperson of the BVEA Negotiating Committee. The
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources shall respond to the request within
five (5) school days in writing, either supplying the requested information or
indicating how the information may be obtained and suggesting a time and
procedure.
B-6.0 PROCEDURE FOR IMPASSE: In the event that tentative agreement cannot be reached on
all items under negotiation by the negotiation teams, or negotiations have not been
concluded by April 15th, unless extended by written mutual consent, an impasse shall
exist, and the following procedure shall be followed:
B-6.1.1 Mediation: The issues in dispute shall be submitted to a mediator for the purpose
of inducing the Board and the Association to make a voluntary agreement.
B-6.1.2 Unless both sides agree otherwise, the Board and the Association shall, within five
(5) days of the declaration of impasse, submit a written request for a mediator to
the American Arbitration Association.
B-6.1.3 The request to the American Arbitration Association shall ask that a list of five
(5) qualified mediators be submitted to the Board and the Association.
B-6.1.4 The mediator shall be selected by the Board and the Association five (5) business
days after receipt of the names of mediators. The procedure shall be (unless
mutually agreed otherwise) for each party to alternately strike names from the
list until only one (1) name remains. This person shall then be asked to mediate
the dispute. The party striking first shall be determined by lot. If the mediator
declines to accept, the last two names stricken from the list shall be sent to the
American Arbitration Association with the request to select the mediator from
between the two.
B-6.1.5 The form, dates and times of meetings shall be arranged by the mediator.
B-6.1.6 The mediator shall meet with representatives of the Board and the Association
either separately or together.
B-6.1.7 If mediation fails in whole or in part, the mediator shall report the issues that
remain in dispute to the Board and the Association.
B-6.1.8 The cost for services of the mediator or the A.A.A., including per diem expenses,
6
===== page 14 =====
if any, and necessary and actual travel expenses, shall be shared equally by the
Board and the Association.
B-6.2 Fact-Finding: If the mediation procedure described above has failed to bring about
agreement on all issues, either party acting through their representative may request in
writing that the issues which remain in dispute be submitted to an advisory fact-finder.
Unless the parties agree otherwise, the method of selection of the fact-finder shall be the
same as that for the selection of a mediator as described in Section B-6.1.1 through B-
6.1.4. Prior to either party agreeing to fact-finding, the parties will hold a pre-hearing
conference with the fact-finder to determine the process and the issues.
B-6.2.1 The fact-finder will have authority to hold meetings and confer with any parties
deemed advisable in seeking to uncover pertinent facts, but he/she/they will not
have authority to incur any costs other than his/her/their own fee without prior
agreement of the Board and the Association.
B-6.2.2 The fact-finder shall provide a written report to the two parties within thirty (30)
calendar days after the hearings have commenced.
B-6.2.3 Representatives of the Association and the Board shall meet within five (5) days
after receiving the recommendations of the fact-finder to review and clarify the
recommendations. The parties may agree to amend the recommendations at this
meeting.
B-6.2.4 The recommendations of the fact-finder and any tentative agreements reached
prior to fact-finding shall be submitted to the Association and the Board for
action, unless the parties have previously agreed to amend the recommendations
in the meeting described in B-6.2.3 above. In such cases, the amended report will
be submitted along with the tentative agreements for the ratification vote.
B-6.2.5 All costs incurred in the above process are to be shared equally by the Board and
the Association.
B-6.2.6 Nothing herein shall preclude the parties from agreeing to combine the mediation
and fact-finding processes under one neutral.
B-7 ADOPTION AND RATIFICATION OF AGREEMENT: tentative agreements reached as a
result of negotiations (including mediation and fact-finding) shall be reduced to writing and
presented to the Association membership for ratification. The Association shall have fifteen
th th
(15) working days, exclusive of June 5 through September 5 , from the date that the
tentative agreement has been presented in which to file a written statement accepting or
rejecting the Agreement. Absence of written statement within this allowed time shall
constitute ratification. Following such ratification, this Agreement shall be presented to the
Board for its ratification.
B-7.1 The Board of Education shall, after public hearing, as required by law, submit to the
appropriate tax levying body a request for such funds as shall be sufficient to
7
===== page 15 =====
fund the proposed operating budget. Final approval of this Agreement is contingent
upon the adoption of a budget by the Boulder Valley Public Schools in compliance with
the School District Budget Law and the appropriations therein of sufficient funds to
meet the financial obligations contained in this Agreement. However, approval of this
Agreement by the Board indicates that they intend to appropriate adequate funds to
implement all provisions of the Agreement. It is expressly understood, however, that
submission of the budget to referendum is the sole prerogative of the Board. Following
the adoption of such budget and after the negotiated agreements are adopted by the
Board, said agreements shall be entered as an addendum to the policies of the District.
B-8 INTERIM NEGOTIATIONS: It is recognized by the Board of Education and the
Association that all situations and developments could not be anticipated at the time this
Agreement was negotiated. Change(s) in the Agreement during its effective dates may be
negotiated when the parties mutually agree that proposed change(s) are necessary. If as a
result of such negotiations, agreement is reached on proposed change(s), such change(s)
will be presented to the Association’s Board of Directors and the Board of Education for
ratification. If both parties ratify the proposed change(s), such change(s) will be signed by
the Board and Association presidents and will become amendment(s) to the existing
Agreement. If the issue(s) under consideration in interim negotiations cannot be resolved,
the issue(s) may become topics for the next negotiations.
SECTION C: DUTIES OF THE EMPLOYEE
C-1 PROFESSIONAL DUTIES: State Statutes, found in Colorado Education Law, define
certain requirements and responsibilities for both employees and Boards of Education.
C-1.1 The employee’s individual contract concerns matters needing understanding between the
Board and an individual before entering into the mutual commitment of
employment.
C-1.2 The District Handbook of Bylaws, Policies and Procedures define most operational matters
for Unit B employees. Duties of the employee include pupil registration,
attendance-keeping and record keeping, pupil discipline, reporting to parents,
supervision of pupils, and the request for, care of, and accounting for
instructional materials and equipment.
C-1.3 If there is an inconsistency between an individual contract and this Agreement on a matter
concerning hours, terms and conditions of employment, this Agreement shall
govern.
C-1.4 This Agreement defines terms and conditions of employment that apply to all members of
Unit B.
C-1.5 No conflict between the individual contract, administrative procedures, Board policies and
the Agreement is intended. In cases where conflict may arise, such will be
rectified.
8
===== page 16 =====
C-2 BOARD POLICIES: The policies of the Board of Education are recognized as being of
vital concern to employees affected by them. Consequently, for actions concerning policies
not covered in this Agreement, which affect employees in Unit B, the administration shall
inform the Association at a reasonable time prior to the initiation of such change, in order
to provide for consultation with organizations members.
C-3 CONTRACT YEAR: The contract year for members of Unit B covered by the BVEA
Salary Schedule shall consist of 186 scheduled days of which 176 days are scheduled
teaching days. One (1) day equals 7.5 hours, inclusive of a 30 minute duty-free lunch. Days
in this section are calculated at 7 hours (minus duty-free lunch).
Five and one-half (5 ½ ) teacher preparation/teacher work days (38.5 hours): one and one-
half (1 ½ ) days before students start school, one (1) day at mid-year at the end of the first
semester and one (1) day at the end of the school year. The other four (4) half days are to
be scheduled by the building on already established Professional Development days in the
Board of Education adopted calendar.
The five and one-half (5 ½ ) teacher preparation/teacher work days will be used solely for
teacher preparation and will not include any duties listed under Professional Development
Days unless agreed upon by the building teachers and the principal through the shared
decision making model in the building.
The four and one-half (4 ½ ) days (31.5 hours are District and/or school) are Professional
Development Days. Any hours that are school directed will be decided in collaboration
between principals and building leadership teams.
Sample Schedules:
FTE Total Scheduled On- Average Teacher Minimum Duty-Free Lunch
Hours Duty Hours Daily Directed Planning Hours per
per per week Hours Hours per week
Week week
1.0 40 37.5 7.5 2.5 4.5 30 min
0.8 32 30 6 2 3.6 30 min
0.67 26.8 25.125 5.025 1.675 3.015 30 min
0.5 20 18.75 3.75 1.25 2.25 N/A
C-3.1 As determined by the District, effective August, 2012 new employees may be
required to work up to two and one half (2 ½) additional days prior to the start of
the contract year without additional compensation. Effective August 2013, new
employees may be required to work up to five (5) additional days without
additional compensation of which two and one half (2 ½) of these days will be
individual teacher directed time in their building.
9
===== page 17 =====
C-4 SCHOOL CALENDAR: A tentative school calendar shall be developed by administrators
and Association members for the academic year and shall be presented to the Board no
later than January 10. At the meeting in February, the Board shall formally adopt this
calendar or set a specific date of adoption of this or any revised calendar. The Board shall
provide BVEA with a copy of any revised calendar at least one month prior to adoption
and the Association will have the opportunity at the next meeting to offer opinions,
preferences and objections.
C-5 EMPLOYEE HOURS AND WORKLOAD: Employees shall be on duty in their respective
buildings 37.5 hours per week as arranged by the principal in cooperation with the faculty.
This on-site time includes employee-directed planning time, necessary travel time directly
related to the teaching schedule, and a guaranteed daily duty-free lunch period of at least
30 minutes. The work week will be 40 hours total in recognition of the work done by
educators outside of the 37.5 hours of building time.
C-5.1 All Unit B employees, as defined in Section A-5, shall receive a minimum of 4
½ hours of employee directed per week. Time beyond the 4 ½ hour minimum
employee-directed planning time shall be designed and coordinated through site-
based shared decision making. Every reasonable effort will be made to provide
planning periods of meaningful length of 30 minutes. Special service providers
and teachers on special assignment will schedule their employee-directed time
accordingly.
C-5.1.1 Every effort shall be made to examine solutions within the school day that would
provide educators with resources, such as substitutes or other compensation, to
attend required meetings while minimizing impact on the 4 1/2 hours of duty-
free planning time. Avenues to address this issue should be established with
building administration, through the FAC, or a BVEA representative.
C-5.2 For those school activities which occur outside the school day, and which require
the presence of an employee(s), an equitable master schedule, developed using
the building’s shared decision making model, will be posted by September 30.
Any additions or changes must be agreed upon through shared decision making.
C-5.3 Extra duty and other special assignments for which the employee receives extra
remuneration shall be in addition to the 40 hour week.
C-5.4 Employees may leave the building during their lunch period but must advise the
office of their intention to be absent.
C-5.5 SENIOR HIGH: Grades 9-12 In high schools, an employee will be assigned no
more than the equivalent of five instructional periods. An employee will be
considered full-time if assigned to five teaching periods between a middle level
10
===== page 18 =====
school (inclusive of K-8 schools grades 6-8) and a senior high school. In all
secondary schools, additional duty time needed during the school day to carry
out Board approved programs and to maintain safety, order and welfare of the
students, or for special programs developed by the faculty, will be equitably
shared by the faculty members of the respective building as these needs arise and
will be agreed upon through shared decision making at the building before
additional duty time is assigned.
Employees who volunteer and are approved to teach more than the five (5)
instructional periods will be compensated at the rate of 0.2 FTE for each
instructional period over five (5).
MIDDLE LEVEL: Grades 6-8 in the middle schools an employee will be
assigned no more than six periods of instruction per day inclusive of study halls.
The District and Association representatives agreed that effective August 2011,
if a school chooses to offer a middle level advisory or similar support program,
teachers participating in the program who are exceeding their six periods of
instruction per day should be compensated at in-service rate for the time they are
working directly with students in an advisory or other support class. An employee
will be considered full-time if assigned to five teaching periods between a middle
level school (inclusive of K-8 schools grades 6-8) and a senior high school. In all
secondary schools, additional duty time needed during the school day to carry
out Board approved programs and to maintain safety, order and welfare of the
students, or for special programs developed by the faculty, will be equitably
shared by the faculty members of the respective building as these needs arise and
will be agreed upon through shared decision making at the building before
additional duty time is assigned.
Employees who volunteer and are approved to teach more than the six (6)
instructional periods will be compensated at the rate of 0.17 FTE for each
instructional period over six (6).
ELEMENTARY LEVEL: For elementary level positions, DDI and MTSS times are
to be clearly defined by the building administration and take place outside the 4.5-hour-
per-week employee-directed planning time. Schools may use discretionary funds for
floating sub coverage during IEP meetings.
C-5.6 The use of time allocations within the school day via shared decision-making will be
communicated by the school administration at the beginning of the school year. The following time
allocations will be communicated to all licensed B employees, via a District-provided template: Non-
student contact days, Wednesday morning late start, staff meetings, and conference exchange days.
C-5.7 Except in unique circumstances, regular classroom employees will not be required
to remain with their classes when the classes are under the supervision of music,
art or physical education specialist.
C-5.8 An employee will not be required to serve on more than one uncompensated
committee. For this purpose, a committee is defined as a group that meets
11
===== page 19 =====
regularly outside the school day once per month or more during any one school
year for more than 1 hour at a time. If a committee is to exceed these parameters
it will be agreed upon through shared decision making at the building.
C-5.9 Counselors will have a caseload not greater than 350 students at the middle school
level and 450 students at the high school level.
C-5.10 CLASSLOAD: If a teacher at any level believes and/or has evidence that the size
and/or composition of his/her/their classload is not consistent with sound and saf
educational practices he/she/they will request a meeting with the building
principal and/or a designated director to review the situation. When requested, the
building administrator and/or designated director shall convene a meeting within
ten 10 working days. The review will consist of consultation and collaboration
between the teacher and the building administrator and/or director to find a timely
solution. Possible solutions could include compensation for additional workload,
paraprofessional support to address increased student needs, additional materials,
clerical assistance, release time for additional paperwork, additional planning
time for progress monitoring, increase in FTE to cover the additional classload,
consultation and professional development, and reallocation of class size or
classload. These solutions are not exhaustive of other mutually agreed upon
means to address classload and classroom composition. If a mutually agreed upon
solution is not reached by the building administration and/or designated director
within five (5) working days following the meeting, a request for assistance can
be made to BVEA and/or HRD.
C-6 ELEMENTARY CLASS SIZE: K-5 Grade Class Size: It is the goal of the School
District to limit the size of
● Grades kindergarten and first to a maximum of 26 pupils
● Grades 2 and 3 to a maximum of 29 pupils
● Grades 4 and 5 to a maximum of 31 pupils.
When it is necessary to combine the aforementioned grades, the class size goal will be
reduced by two with the lowest grade level used as the guideline. The District will make
every reasonable effort to meet these goals by adjusting classes within the building, the
principal shall meet with the affected employee, and every reasonable effort shall be made
to grant assistance to such teacher through reallocations of building resources (e.g.
paraeducator time, additional materials, clerical assistance, and/or release duty time).
Should such resources for assistance not be available at the building level, the appropriate
District administrator shall meet with the affected employee and the building principal to
determine what assistance, if any, will be provided.
C-6.1 Students who receive special education services will have an IEP. The IEP is
collaboratively developed by the IEP Team, who will determine the appropriate
programming. The IEP Team will include general educators, parents, and special
education personnel. The regular classroom employee will have access to IEP
information and will determine, in collaboration with special education staff,
what additional assistance, if any, is required in terms of the child’s successful
12
===== page 20 =====
inclusion. Assistance for special education students in the general classroom may
include consultative services, instruction support, and possibly team teaching
from special education personnel. The special education case managers will be
responsible for overseeing the implementation of the IEP and monitoring student
progress on the IEP. Concerns regarding the student’s IEP will be addressed
through the IEP review process.
C-6.2 When children from the regular classroom are taught by a special education teacher
outside the general classroom, the classroom teacher and special education teacher will
collaborate and parents will be appraised of and give prior approval to this service.
C-6.3 When non-English speaking children are placed in regular classrooms, the employee
may request, through the principal, assistance from available District resources.
C-6.4 Upon request, the appropriate District administrator will meet with the employees
involved and the principal to assist in resolving any difficulties or problems that
arise.
C-7 SECONDARY STUDENT LOAD
C-7.1 SENIOR HIGH: Grades 9-12 in all senior level teaching assignments, except
physical education and music, every reasonable effort shall be made so that the
total load shall not exceed a maximum of 775 students per week exclusive of
study hall. The 775 students per week will apply on a prorated basis to health
classes. This does not preclude an employee from requesting an additional load
beyond the maximum stated above.
C-7.1.1 Integration of students with disabilities in the secondary classes shall be
accomplished as per the provisions contained in C-6.1, 2, 3, and 4.
C-7.2 MIDDLE LEVEL: Grades 6-8 in all middle level teaching assignments, except
physical education and music, every reasonable effort shall be made so that the
total load shall not exceed a maximum of 775 students per week exclusive of
study hall. The 775 students per week will apply on a prorated basis to health
classes. This does not preclude an employee from requesting an additional load
beyond the maximum stated above.
C-7.2.1 Integration of students with disabilities in the secondary classes shall be
accomplished as per the provisions contained in C-6.2, 3, 4, and 5.
C-8 GRADE REPORTING DEADLINES:
C-8.1 GRADING PERIODS DURING SCHOOL YEAR: There shall be a minimum of
three teaching days between the end of the grading period and the deadline for
submitting grade reports at the building level.
C-8.2 END OF YEAR GRADING PERIOD: In the event that one full day or its equivalent
of released time is not made available to employees during the final three days
13
===== page 21 =====
of the school year, grade reports will be submitted no later than three business
days (Monday through Friday, not including official holidays) after the end of
the grading period.
C-9 PARAEDUCATORS: The Board reaffirms the important role paraeducators play in assisting
the faculty in the educational program of the District. It further agrees to provide
paraeducators in both the elementary and secondary schools as determined by sound
educational and staffing requirements. Priority for paraeducators time will be given: (1) to
relieve class overloads, (2) to staffing of resource centers, and (3) to meet unique and/or
unusual needs of a particular school as those needs arise. Allocation of paraeducator hours at
the building level shall be made through the shared decision making process.
C-10 DEPARTMENT CHAIRPERSONS AND TEAM LEADERS: Funds will be allocated to
secondary buildings to provide released time and/or compensation for staff members who
are asked to assume substantive non-classroom duties as determined through the shared
decision making process.
If department chairpersons and/or team leaders are appointed with the traditional role
definitions and expectations, the rates in Section E-12 shall apply. For other leadership
responsibilities, compensation shall be determined through shared decision making.
C-11 STAFF MEETINGS: Regular building staff meetings shall be scheduled as needed on
Thursdays. These meetings may include staff development, team meetings, committees
and administration meetings and are not to exceed 60 minutes in duration per week, unless
there is a collaborative agreement to meet beyond the 60 minute per week. Either party
may request facilitation if a collaborative agreement cannot be reached through shared
decision making. Staff and administration will collaboratively meet to plan the time for
committees and meetings at the beginning of the school year or at the end of the school
year. An annual review of the effectiveness and efficiency of the committees and meetings
will be done jointly with staff and administration.
Announcements, including major topics, shall be made at least 24 hours in advance of the
meeting. Special meetings may be called by the principal to deal with emergencies but
such meetings shall be kept to a minimum and shall deal with only those emergency items
for which the meeting was called. Every effort shall be made to keep all meetings as short
as possible; furthermore, if these are items that are only informational and can be
communicated through email, the meeting shall be cancelled. Employees are required to
attend staff meetings unless excused by the principal. For those staff unable to attend
regularly scheduled faculty meetings, the Principal may choose to schedule a makeup
meeting.
C-12 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS: Pre-School Sessions: Each employee is to attend the
pre-school session for all employees. Each employee is to attend the appropriate grade or
departmental meetings and building faculty meetings.
C-12.1 First Aid: First aid policies shall be as stipulated by the Board of Education
policy adopted August 23, 1976.
C-13 CLASSROOM COVERAGE: When vacancies in the classroom occur, and where it is not
practical to secure a substitute, the principal will make every effort to ask appropriate
14
===== page 22 =====
volunteers to cover the vacancy. If no volunteer surfaces in a timely fashion, the principal
may assign an employee to cover the vacancy. If such an assignment is made by the
principal, the employee will be entitled to compensation at curriculum rate for lost plan
time and/or duty free lunch (See Section E-4).
C-13.1 The above does not preclude voluntary arrangements between employees as
approved by the building principal. There shall be no extra pay for these
voluntary arrangements.
C-13.2 Absences at the Request of Administration: Employee absences, which are created
by the school administration, will be covered by substitutes. When it is not
possible to provide a substitute, the absence will be covered as indicated in
“classroom vacancies” above.
C-14 STUDENT DISCIPLINE: When administering pupil discipline, employees are required to
exercise appropriate judgment and control. The employee may restrain the pupil until other
action may be taken or the employee may refer a pupil to the school office. The pupil will
not be returned to class during the same class period at the secondary level and within
approximately thirty (30) minutes of the referral at the elementary level. This requirement
may be deemed inapplicable for subsequent referrals of the same student, or another
student for the same offense, only after a conference has been held between the appropriate
superior and the employee regarding future expectations for disciplinary action in these
situations. The employee will be notified of any disciplinary action, or lack thereof, taken
with regard to the pupil referred and the reason(s) for such.
C-14.1 In the event the employee has concern over the decision of the principal or
designee, he/she/they may request a meeting with a representative of the
Association and the principal or designee. If the issue remains unresolved, the
employee may request a meeting with a representative of the Association and the
appropriate District administrator or designee.
C-15 USE OF PHYSICAL INTERVENTION: An employee may apply reasonable physical
intervention techniques to prevent students from harming themselves or others.
C-15.1 When it is necessary for the employee to be absent from normal duties to participate
in parent conferences or meetings with other appropriate agencies, or to consult
with an attorney regarding defense of assault charges when it cannot be done
outside the teaching day, as a result of or arising out of the application of physical
force as set forth in C-15, and provided that such absence is necessitated as a
result of performing his/her/their duties, and not caused by his/her/their own
negligence, the employee shall not suffer a loss of pay for the period of such
absence, on account of such absence.
C-15.2 The Board may reimburse an employee for the cost in excess of insurance benefits
received for medical, surgical, or hospital services incurred as a direct result of
injury sustained in the course of his/her/their employment if recommended by
the Superintendent, but may not reimburse for consequential damages or
aggravation of pre-existing injuries and shall not exceed the amount of
his/her/their current salary.
15
===== page 23 =====
C-15.3 Employees will report any such incidents as soon as practically possible and in
accordance with relevant Board policies and statutes.
C-15.4 The parties acknowledge that this subsection of the Agreement is informed by
Board Policy JK et. seq. Should those policies be substantially revised, the parties
agree to review the corresponding provisions of this Agreement with the intent
of maintaining alignment between the documents.
C-16 LEGAL COUNSEL: The Board shall provide legal counsel of its selection, if
recommended by the Superintendent to employees in actions arising out of disciplinary
action involving a pupil of the School District while in the proper discharge of duties within
the scope of his/her/their employment.
C-16.1 Employees shall make every attempt to report as soon as possible, but no later than
the following morning, cases concerning C-15 to their principal, or in
his/her/their absence, some other District administrator.
C-17 TRANSPORTATION OF STUDENTS: Employees shall not be required to transport
pupils to activities which take place away from the school building.
C-18 ASSIGNMENT OF SPECIALISTS
C-18.1 Special Education
If a special education employee believes and/or has evidence that the size and/or
composition of his/her/their caseload is not consistent with sound and safe
educational practices, he/she/they will request a meeting with the building
principal and/or a designated special education director to review the situation.
When requested the building administrator and/or designated special education
director shall convene a meeting within ten 10 working days. The review will
consist of consultation and collaboration between the special education employee
and the building administrator and/or special education director to find a timely
solution. Possible solutions could include compensation for additional workload,
paraprofessional support to address increased student needs, release time for
additional special education paperwork, additional planning time for progress
monitoring, hired assistants for specialists and/or an increase in FTE to cover the
additional caseload. These solutions are not exhaustive of other mutually agreed
upon means to address caseload. If a mutually agreed upon solution is not reached
by the building administration and/or designated special education director
within five (5) working days following the meeting request for assistance can be
made to BVEA and/or HRD.
If no agreement is reached to relieve the situation within five (5) days, the issue
will be taken to the Designated Director of Special Education who will review
the caseload using the appropriate formula as well as other factors and will inform
the employee of his/her/their decision in writing within ten (10) working days. If
the special education employee continues to have concerns, a request for
assistance can be made to BVEA and HRD. The District will make every
16
===== page 24 =====
reasonable effort to meet the following IEP special education caseload
guidelines.
OT/PT 1:50
PSY/SW See below*
SLP 1:43 Elementary/1:46 Secondary
Resource 1:21 Elementary/1:25 Middle/High School
Multi-intensive 1:10 All levels
ILC – Multi/Autism 1:10 All levels
ICAN 1:10 Elementary/Middle School/1:15 High School
Day Treatment 1:8
BCBA 1:3 ILC classrooms
ECSE 1:5 fall and 1:7 mid-year per cohort, case-managed
students only
ECSE ILC 1:10
*School psychologists and social workers shall use an annual assignment
formulated using a weighted calculation of school enrollment and number of
students on IEPs. If the formula does not meet the size and composition of the
needs of the school during the year, the caseload review process should be
initiated per the above guidelines. 1:50 may continue to be appropriate guidance
for caseload review.
C-18.2 Teacher Librarians
If a Teacher Librarian believes that the staffing in his/her/their building library
media center is not adequate to provide sufficient educational services,
he/she/they will meet with the building principal to review the situation. Every
reasonable effort will be made to come to a mutual agreement to satisfy the
situation. If no agreement is reached to relieve the situation within five (5) days,
the issue will be taken to the Assistant Superintendent who will inform the
employee of his/her/their decision in writing within ten (10) work days.
BVEA and BVSD will continue to promote the adoption of the proposed Teacher
Librarian Key Indicators to ensure a reasonable workload for teacher librarians
who are less than 1.0 FTE. The school principal and teacher librarian will meet
no later than September 1 and agree to a reasonable workload as per the library
guidelines, when less than 1.0 FTE
C-18.3 Elementary Specialist Assignments
Art, music and physical education classes at the elementary level will be built on a
rotating schedule equally distributed for each special with ABC being the preferred
schedule whenever possible. A maximum of 325 instructional minutes per day (50
minutes of instruction per class, including a 5-minute transition time between
classes), will be considered a full time assignment or 1.0 FTE. This is based on a
seven (7) hour school day. Minutes shall be adjusted on days that are less than 7
hours. If assigned specialist class time is less than the number of minutes associated
with the assigned FTE, the specialist will receive additional instructional
17
===== page 25 =====
assignments.
Number of Sections FTE Instructional Minutes 7 hour day
1.0-6.0 sections 0.0556 x # of sections 55 minutes (50 instructional + 5 passing) x # of sections
7.0-9.0 sections 0.5 FTE 485
10.0-12.0 sections 0.667 FTE 650
13.0-15.0 sections 0.834 FTE 810
16.0-18.0 sections 1.0 FTE 975
Multiple School Assignments: When elementary Art, Music and P.E. specialists
are assigned to more than one location during a school day, a section (.0556 FTE)
will be allocated for travel between schools. The additional allocation will cover
transitions, travel time, and the additional time required to work at more than one
location. If the additional allocation for transitions, travel time and the additional
time required to work at more than one location is insufficient, they may request
additional time from the Human Resources Department.
For Elementary Instrumental Music, every reasonable effort shall be made so that
the total in a section shall not exceed 33 students. An Assist (a licensed music
teacher to co-teach) may be provided once a class exceeds this maximum.
C-18.4 Secondary Music and Physical Education Assignments
In all secondary level Music teaching assignments, every reasonable effort shall
be made so that the total load shall not exceed a maximum of 1000 students per
week exclusive of study hall, and the number of students in a section shall not
exceed those caps stated below. This does not preclude an employee from
requesting an additional load beyond the total or section maximums.
Class sections are capped as follows:
High School Instrumental Music = 52 students
High School Choir = 60 students
Middle School Instrumental Music = 40 students
Middle School Choir = 45 students
18
===== page 26 =====
Additional FTE for an Assist (a licensed music teacher to co-teach) or another
class section may be provided when the number of students in a class exceeds
these caps.
In all secondary level Physical Education teaching assignments, every reasonable
effort shall be made so that the total load shall not exceed a maximum of 1000
students per week exclusive of study hall. This does not preclude an employee
from requesting an additional load beyond the maximum stated above.
Additional FTE for a co-teacher or another class section will be provided when
the number of students in a class exceeds 45.
C-19 STAFFING
The District agrees to provide the Association a copy of the Elementary and Secondary
staffing appeals document in the fall and as it is updated throughout the school year.
Any spring updates will be provided upon request. These documents will include a separate
column identifying denials and the reason for such denial.
C-20 ASSESSMENT
The District and the Association agree that the primary responsibility of teachers is to
provide instruction. As soon as a list of required State or Federal assessments have been
released, the staff will design and/or agree upon a testing schedule using the building
shared decision making model. If district level tests are needed for a specific and valid
reason, including the adoption of new curriculum, these shall be agreed upon through
shared decision making by the District Assessment Team (DAT). The Team shall be
comprised of ten (10) members of Unit B and six (6) administrators as follows: one
elementary, one middle, and one high school general education teacher; one elementary,
one middle, and one high school special education teacher; one literacy TOSA; one math
TOSA; one special education TOSA; a BVEA officer or designee; one elementary
administrator; one middle level administrator; one K-8 administrator; one high school
administrator; one central office administrator; and the Superintendent or designee. This
representation must include teachers of emerging bilinguals and must be representative of
a variety of schools. IT consultation may be included for the implementation of data entry
and retrieval for these assessments. All Unit B members of this committee will be BVEA
members.
C-20.1 The District Assessment Team will be co-chaired by the BVEA officer (or
designee) and an administrator.
C-20.2 For any assessments approved by the DAT, consideration shall be given to the
amount of time to administer, score, and enter data, and the technology needed
for the assessment.
19
===== page 27 =====
C-20.3 Any teacher who feels unduly burdened with assessments may call for a review of
the time devoted to all aspects of the testing. This review will begin with building
level administrators. Possible compensation could be in the form of release days
or curriculum pay. If the teacher continues to have concerns, a request for
assistance can be made to BVEA and HRD.
C-21 ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE
Only employees in a leadership role (i.e., ESL Coordinators, TOSAs, Deans, Department
Chairs, and Counselors) will be required to ask parents to waive out of ESL.
C-22 OPENING, CLOSING AND REORGANIZATING SCHOOLS
In the event that the Board of Education decides to open, close or reorganize any school
within the District, Human Resources will collaborate with Unit B leadership to address the
interests of affected teachers. This collaboration will take place in as timely a manner as
possible.
C-23 ASSESSMENT
The district will hold assessment information electronically to be printed out at the building
level as available. Rosters for schools, classes and individual students will be available at
each school as availability permits.
C-24 TECHNOLOGY
The district will coordinate a mixed ability and mixed level voluntary users group of
teachers and district administrator to continue the discussion about the effective use of
technology. This group will foster communication and provide two-way dialogue as the
school district works to increase efficiency in technology use and examine streamlining
paperwork into the future.
C-25 SPECIAL EDUCATION
Special Education staff will not be required to head up 504 teams or manage 504
accommodations for non-special education students. Special Education staff will not be
required to maintain individual MTSS plans or READ plans but are welcome to collaborate
with the general educator.
MTSS is a general education responsibility and initiative, but oftentimes specialists can be
experts in offering interventions. School Psychologists and social workers will serve as the
bridge between MTSS and special education through process collaboration and consultation
with the MTSS team.
20
===== page 28 =====
C-26 PROPERTY PROTECTION/EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITY FOR FUNDS
1. The district will make a reasonable effort to provide a safe and convenient place for
employees to deposit personal property in each school.
2. A total of $5,000 per semester will be proportionally available for these provisions.
Distribution of claims will take place within 30 calendar days from the end of each
semester.
a. In the event a teacher, while acting in the scope of his/her/their employment,
has his/her/their clothing or other personal property damaged or destroyed,
as a result of an attack, assault, menace, vandalism, or pupil supervision
problem, the District will reimburse the teacher the cost of repair or
reasonable replacement up to $500 or the insurance deductible, whichever
is less, of such property.
b. Given prudent and responsible handling, the District will reimburse/replace
for wallets/purses, outer-wear and briefcases which are stolen while on
school grounds up to $500 or the insurance deductible, whichever is less.
c. Given prudent and responsible handling, the District will reimburse/replace
for stolen or damaged personal property used for instructional purposes at
school with prior documentation and approval up to $500 or the insurance
deductible, whichever is less.
d. The district will pay up to $500 or the insurance deductible, whichever is
less, for automobile damages because of theft or vandalism provided the
automobile was on school grounds and the employee was acting within the
scope of his/her/their employment.
e. In order for the District to reimburse the teacher for losses as outlined in the
above sections, the teacher must a) submit a written request within ten
(10)days of the incident; b) the District deems the request of the teacher to
be meritorious.
f. To be reimbursed for property loss, the teacher must complete the
REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM and attach copies of the teacher’s
insurance declaration sheet, police report in cases of theft and/or serious
vandalism and/or principal’s report when appropriate. The completed form
and attachments shall be submitted to the district office within ten (10) days
of the incident.
3. Whenever an employee is assigned by the District the responsibility of handling funds
and follows the established District/school procedures the Board shall provide theft of
money coverage for that individual.
C-27 NON PROFESSIONAL DUTIES: The District agrees that the primary responsibility of
teachers is to provide instruction. Whenever a building administrator anticipates the need
for assigning teachers to other duties during the 40 hour work week such as before and after
school, bus and playground supervision, and/or hallway monitoring, the administrator and
the teachers must agree upon a plan and schedule through the shared decision making model
at the building. The administration and faculty will problem-solve in order to minimize the
21
===== page 29 =====
impact on instruction and will explore the use of other building resources and volunteers
(as appropriate) to meet the need. Such duties will be equitably assigned within the building.
An equitable master schedule, developed using the building’s shared decision making
model, will be posted by September 30. Any additions or changes must be agreed upon
through the shared decision making.
In the absence of an emergency situation, teachers will not be assigned to perform duties
typically performed by custodians, campus monitors, or food service employees. In the
event that the faculty and the building administration cannot agree to a resolution, either
party may contact HRD or BVEA to provide additional facilitation.
C-28 STAFF FEEDBACK OF BUILDING ADMINISTRATION: To maintain highly effective
schools, to provide meaningful input into shared decision making, and to increase
communication between Unit B employees and administration, the BVEA and the BVSD
have agreed to implement an annual building survey.
1. The TLCC Colorado online survey shall be administered every other year to all
staff members and will be administered in the spring semester during a
scheduled staff meeting.
2. In non-TLCC years, each building shall develop a customized online survey
created through a shared decision making process that will meet the following
criteria:
a. Is aligned with the BVSD Mission, Vision and Goals as well as the BVSD
Educator Effectiveness Principal Standards
b. Is no more than 10 (ten) questions
c. Survey questions are identified no later than October 31
d. Survey will be administered no later than March 10 during a scheduled
staff meeting
3. Results from the TLCC Colorado, BVSD online survey, and other district
surveys will be used to support building goals in a collaborative manner
C-29 CIVILITY
C-29.1 The District and the Association agree that schools need to be orderly, peaceful
environments where high-quality education can take place.
C-29.2 In order to provide safe schools for employees and students while protecting the
integrity of the learning environment, there must be policies and procedures that address
the various aspects of school safety.
C-29.3 Educators deserve respectful communications and are not expected to subject
themselves to uncivil interactions in the workplace. If concerns by parents, guardians,
advocates, students, or colleagues are expressed through the use of insults, profanity, or
other language or behavior that is demeaning, abusive, threatening, or obscene, the staff
member is not obligated to continue the meeting or discussion.
22
===== page 30 =====
C-29.4 Staff members who believe they have been subjected to uncivil conduct in the
workplace are encouraged to report the incident to the principal or workplace supervisor and to
request an investigation or support. Staff members who believe they have been subjected to or
witnessed harassment or discrimination are encouraged to file a complaint with either an
immediate supervisor or the School District's compliance officer in accordance with Board
Policy AC. Threats should be reported to security. To the extent appropriate and permitted by
law, the results of any investigation will be reported to the staff member who made the report.
SECTION D: EMPLOYMENT
D-1 NON-DISCRIMINATON: The School Board and the Association reaffirm that there shall
be no discrimination against any employee because of race, age, marital status, creed, color,
sex, national origin, sexual orientation and disability, or participation in any professional
educational organization.
D-2 HEALTH EXAMINATION: A special health examination may be required whenever a
physical or mental condition interferes, or appears likely to interfere, with the health and
safety of other employees or pupils or the education of pupils. An employee may also be
required to have a written report from a qualified physician showing that he/she/they is
physically capable of doing the work required of his/her/their position. The costs of these
special health exams shall be paid by the District.
D-3 EMPLOYMENT STATUS: Each year of the first three years of employment is considered
a probationary year in the Boulder Valley Schools. During such three years, the
probationary employee shall be given constructive leadership and guidance by the
administrative and supervisory staff.
th
D-3.1 No later than May 15 , the principal shall advise the probationary employee on a
regular contract of his/her/their intent to recommend to the Board of Education
renewal or nonrenewal of the probationary employee’s contract.
D-3.2 A probationary employee employed by the School District on a regular contract shall
be deemed to be re-employed for the succeeding academic year at the salary which
he/she/they would be entitled to receive under the appropriate salary schedule
unless the Board shall cause written notice to the contrary to be given to said
employee on or before June 1 of the academic year during which said probationary
employee is employed.
D-4 The Board of Education appropriate policy concerning employment, dismissal, termination,
and non-renewals of employees shall be in accordance with state law.
D-5 EVALUATION PURPOSES: Consistent with the state law the purposes of the evaluation
system shall be to ensure that all licensed personnel are evaluated using multiple, fair,
transparent, timely, rigorous, and valid methods; ensure that all licensed personnel receive
adequate feedback and professional development support to provide them a meaningful
opportunity to improve their effectiveness; provide a basis for the improvement of
23
===== page 31 =====
instruction; enhance implementation of programs of curriculum; provide for the
measurement of satisfactory performance for individual licensed personnel and serve as
documentation for unsatisfactory performance; serve as a measurement of the professional
growth and development of licensed personnel; and, to ensure that all licensed personnel
are provided the means to share effective practices with other teachers throughout the state.
The parties agree that the evaluation system is a process that:
a. Is a collaborative, equitable process based upon trust and mutual respect
b. Has a shared understanding among all participants of what quality
performance looks like
c. Shares the goal of maximizing individual student, teacher, and administrator
growth and potential
d. Is based upon a valid reliable, qualitative (e.g., self, supervisor, peer
observation; student and parent feedback) and quantitative body of evidence
that draws upon a variety of sources for data (e.g., formative and summative
assessments, portfolios, videos, lesson plans, etc.)
e. Is timely and specific
f. Includes peer observation, self-reflection, and goal setting
g. Drives professional development
h. Is supportive, worthwhile, and has integrity
D-6 EVALUATION SEQUENCE
D-6.1 Employees
All members of the bargaining unit will be evaluated each school year.
D-6.2 Split Assignments
The principal of the building where the employee is assigned the largest
percentage of time will be responsible for the evaluation. In situations where
percentages are equal or other arrangements need to be made, the principals
involved will work with HRD to determine the designated evaluator. The
designated evaluator will collaborate with the other principals with whom the
employee works when facilitating the evaluation.
D-7 PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES
D-7.1 Evaluator
Employee evaluations shall be the responsibility of the principal, program director
or an assistant principal.
D-7.2 General Meeting
24
===== page 32 =====
th
By September 15 , the evaluator will meet with the employee, individually or in
a general meeting, to authorize the evaluation process, timelines, and review The
Boulder Valley School District Effective Teacher Standards, Elements, and
Professional Practices and Measures of Student Learning Framework.
The educator will draft an evaluation plan which will include conducting a self-
reflection, setting SMART professional growth goals, identifying his/ her/their
current and desired state, and any additional information relevant to the goal.
D-7.3 INDIVIDUAL MEETING
By October 15, the educator and administrator will meet to collaboratively review
the self-reflection, finalize the priority growth goals, the overall evaluation plan,
and determine Measures of Student Learning.
D-7.4 OBSERVATIONS
The employee shall be observed on not less than four (4) separate occasions in the
classroom following the date of employment. Two (2) observations must be
completed no later than January 15. One (1) of the two required observations must
be at least thirty (30) minutes in duration with prior knowledge of the employee.
Two (2) additional observations must be completed by March 31st. One (1) of the
two (2) required observations during each grading period must be at least thirty
(30) minutes in duration with the prior knowledge of the employee.
Within five (5) working days of each observation, the evaluator will provide the employee
with written feedback. An in-person meeting may be scheduled at the request of either
party to debrief the written feedback. In the event of extenuating circumstances that
prevent the evaluator from meeting the five (5) working day timeline, the evaluator will
communicate the delay to the employee as soon as practicable and provide a revised
timeline.
D-7.5 REPORTS AND CONFERENCES
D-7.5.1 The evaluator shall discuss progress with each probationary employee and
provide a written progress report by January 30. The written progress
report will include performance expectations, performance indicators,
strategies, and a reasonable timeline for improvement.
D-7.5.2 The evaluator shall provide each employee with a summative evaluation
draft no later than March 31st. The draft should include preliminary
ratings for both Professional Practice and Measures of Student Learning.
Any probationary teachers who will be non-renewed for any reason,
must receive their draft summative evaluation prior to the non-renewal
notice.
D-7.5.3 The summative evaluation must be finalized in COPMS by May10th, and
25
===== page 33 =====
ratings must include a Professional Practice, Measures of Student
Learning, and Overall Effectiveness Rating.
D-7.6 APPEAL
A probationary employee whose performance has been determined to be such as to justify
dismissal or non-renewal by the principal may request a review of the decision by the
Superintendent or his/her/their designee. The decision of the Superintendent or his/her/their
designee shall be final.
D-8 NON-PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES: LEVEL I
Level one is designated to encourage risk taking, reduce the stress often attached to the
evaluation process, and build a sense of collaboration between the employee and the
evaluator. The process should be meaningful and relevant while allowing for a great deal
of flexibility and streamlining. The employee, in collaboration with the designated
evaluator, is responsible for orchestrating his/her/their own evaluation in accordance with
BVSD’s data collection and reporting procedures.
D-8.1 STEP 1: General Meeting
By September 15, the evaluator will meet with employees, individually, or in a
general meeting, to authorize the evaluation process, timelines, clarify roles, and
discuss how the parties involved will work with one another throughout the
process.
D-8.2 STEP 2: Employee Pre-Planning
The educator will draft an evaluation plan which will include conducting a self-
reflection, setting SMART professional growth goals, identifying his/her/their
current and desired state, and any additional information relevant to the goal.
a. The evaluation plan will also include professional learning activities to meet
those goals or to enhance professional practice, particularly those to be
submitted for tuition reimbursement or movement on the salary schedule.
D-8.3 STEP 3: Individual Meeting
By October 15, the educator and administrator will meet to collaboratively review
the self-reflection, finalize the priority growth goals, the overall evaluation plan,
and determine Measures of Student Learning.
D-8.3.1 Strategies for conducting the evaluation process and collecting data to
document progress are flexible. The following options and/or a
combination of several might be considered:
a. structured approach using the four effectiveness standards
b. classroom observations with pre and post conferences
c. portfolio approach – possibly utilizing peer, parent and/or
26
===== page 34 =====
student input
d. involvement of peers, parents and/or students in a team
approach
e. self-evaluation coupled with one or more of the above
f. peer appraisal with information and updates shared with the
evaluator of record
g. self designated process, which is mutually agreed upon by the
employee and evaluator
D-8.3.2 All employees being evaluated through the level one process will be formally
observed at least one time by the evaluator. Within five (5) working days of
each observation, the evaluator will provide the employee with written
feedback. An in-person meeting may be scheduled at the request of either
party to debrief the written feedback. In the event of extenuating
circumstances that prevent the evaluator from meeting the five (5) working
day timeline, the evaluator will communicate the delay to the employee as
soon as practicable and provide a revised timeline.
Length of the evaluation process is determined by mutual agreement,
th
but must be concluded by May 10 .
D-8.4 STEP 4: Evaluation Draft
Upon completion of the agreed process, a written draft of the final summative
evaluation is discussed and edited by the employee and evaluator. This draft will
include a growth and improvement plan as required by state statute. The draft
should also include preliminary ratings for Professional Practice and Measures of
Student Learning.
D-8.5 STEP 5: Final Evaluation
The final copy of the summative evaluation is signed by both parties and finalized
in COPMS.
D-8.6 The growth and improvement plan developed as part of the final written
evaluation should serve as a foundation for continuing dialogue between the
employee and the evaluator.
D-8.7 At any point in the Level I process, the evaluator may place an employee
on the Level II process consistent with section D-9.2.1. An employee
whose Professional Practices rating is partially effective or lower will be
placed on the Level II process for the following school year.
D-9 NON-PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES: LEVEL II
PURPOSES: The purpose of a Level II evaluation shall be to address concerns, gather
27
===== page 35 =====
information through a series of classroom observations, and to have the evaluator and
employee work together to develop a plan for improvement of instruction. Level II is
designed to measure satisfactory performance for individual licensed personnel and can
also serve as documentation for unsatisfactory performance dismissal.
D-9.1 Evaluator
Employee evaluations shall be the responsibility of the principal, program director or an
assistant principal.
D-9.2 STEP 1: Initiation of Written Notification and Conference
This step is designated to be a series of observations by the evaluator to gather and share
information with the employee.
D-9.2.1 The principal or assistant principal may place an employee on the Level II
evaluation process by providing written notification to the employee stating the
reasons.
D-9.2.2 The initiation of the Level II evaluation process may occur at any time during the
school year.
D-9.2.3 At least one week prior to starting Step 2, evaluator shall meet with the employee
to discuss and clarify the following:
a. overall process and timeline
b. copy of “Evaluation Standards and Criteria”
c. expectations regarding areas of performance concerns
d. primary evaluator
e. data sources
f. frequency of observations and observation conferences
g. copy of Level II evaluation process
The evaluator will provide the employee a written summary of the understandings
reached in the meeting.
D-9.2.4 The employee may request a meeting with the evaluator, an Association
representative, and the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources or
his/her/their designee for the purpose of reviewing the initiation of the Level II
process.
D-9.3 STEP 2: Weeks One – Twelve (1-
12)
D-9.3.1 Information Gathering and Observations
This step in the process is intended to open communication between the employee
28
===== page 36 =====
and evaluator to share concerns and ensure an understanding of the process.
a. The employee shall be observed not less than once every two
(2) weeks. Such observations must be at least thirty (30) minutes in
duration.
b. Within two (2) working days after each observation the evaluator will
provide the employee written feedback as a part of the observation process.
c. The evaluator will conduct observations and collect data in accordance
with sections D-9.6.1, D-9.6.2, D-9.6.3.
D-9.3.2 At the end of the twelve (12) week period the evaluator shall discuss progress with
the employee and provide an interim written progress report to the employee.
Once the employee’s performance has improved satisfactorily, the report shall so
state, and the employee returns to Level I process.
a. If performance concerns continue to exist, the interim written progress report
shall so state and will include a written improvement plan that addresses the
performance concerns. The improvement plan will include performance
expectations, performance indicators, strategies for improvement,
reasonable timelines and resources as provided in section D- 9.6.4.
D-9.3.3 The employee may request a meeting with the evaluator, an Association
representative, and the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources or
his/her/their designee for the purpose of reviewing the interim written progress
report.
D-9.4 STEP 3: Weeks Thirteen – Twenty-Four (13-24) Improvement Plan
Implementation
This step begins with the development of an Improvement Plan followed by the
observations to assess progress.
D-9.4.1 During this period the improvement plan will be implemented and monitored.
D-9.4.2 Observations
a. The employee shall be observed not less than once every two
(2) weeks. Such observations must be at least thirty (30) minutes in
duration.
b. Within two (2) working days after each observation the evaluator will
provide the employee written feedback as a part of the observation process.
c. The evaluator will conduct observations and collect data in accordance
with sections D-9.6.1, D-9.6.2, D-9.6.3.
D-9.4.3 At the end of the twelve (12) week period the evaluator shall discuss progress with
the employee and provide a written evaluation report to the employee.
a. If the employees performance has improved satisfactorily, the report shall
so state and the employee returns to the Level I process.
29
===== page 37 =====
b. If performance concerns continue to exist, the written evaluation report
shall so state and specify that the employee is placed on remediation.
D-9.5 STEP 4: Weeks Twenty-Five – Thirty-Three (25-33)
D-9.5.1 As soon as possible after completion of the written evaluation report in D-9.4.3,
the evaluator and the employee will meet to develop a remediation plan. The
remediation plan will include performance expectations, performance indicators,
strategies for improvement, reasonable timelines, and resources as provided in
section D-9.6.4. In addition, the evaluator will clarify the process for monitoring
the remediation plan.
D-9.5.2 Observations
a. The employee shall be observed not less than once every two
(2) weeks. Such observations must be at least thirty (30) minutes in
duration.
b. Within two (2) working days after each observation the evaluator will
provide the employee written feedback as a part of the observation process.
c. The evaluator will conduct observations and collect data in accordance
with sections D-9.6.1, D-9.6.2, D-9.6.3.
D-9.5.3 At the end of the nine (9) week period the evaluator shall discuss the employee’s
employment status and provide a written summary to the employee.
a. Once the employee’s performance has improved satisfactorily, the summary
shall so state and the employee returns to the Level I process.
b. If performance concerns continue to exist and are not such as to justify
dismissal, the employee will continue on the improvement plan as provided
in section D-9.4, Step 3.
c. If the evaluator considers the employee’s deficiencies to be such as to justify
dismissal, the summary shall so state.
D-9.6 General Provisions
D-9.6.1 Observations and Data Collection
All observations will be conducted openly and with the knowledge of the
employee being evaluated. These observations will be a combination of scheduled
and unscheduled visits. An effort will be made to conduct the observations at
different times during the work day. The frequency and duration of observations
and the data collection must be sufficient to support conclusions drawn.
D-9.6.2 Complaints
a. Complaints about the employee’s performance that may be a part of the
30
===== page 38 =====
employee’s evaluation will be shared with the employee in writing within
five (5) working days.
b. Anonymous complaints will not become a part of an employee’s evaluation.
D-9.6.3 Extra Duty Assignments
Any evaluation of extra duty assignments shall be separate and apart from the
Level II evaluation process.
D-9.6.4 Resources
If either the evaluator or employee requests, assistance may also be provided
by other employees and/or professional personnel. The evaluator may select
two or more persons, one of whom is mutually agreed upon by the employee
involved, to assist the employee. Upon the selection, the parties involved
will meet to discuss the nature of the assistance to be provided and the
appropriate timelines. Unless mutually agreed upon by the parties involved,
individuals who provide this assistance will not be expected to provide
evaluation data. The District will provide reasonable release time necessary
for such assistance subject to the approval of the Assistant Superintendent of
Human Resources.
D-9.6.5 Signatures
a. The written evaluation report shall be signed by the evaluator and the
employee with each receiving a copy of the report. The signature on the
report of any person shall not be construed to indicate agreement with the
information contained in the report.
b. The written evaluation report shall be reviewed and signed by a supervisor
of the evaluator. A copy of the report shall be filed in the employee’s district
personnel file.
D-9.6.6 Response to Written Evaluation Report
a. The employee may grieve the written evaluation report as provided in
section G-1. With regard to the Level II process, the parties have agreed to
use a problem solving approach through Step 3. A grievance covering D-9
may be filed and considered timely if filed within fifteen (15) days of the
receipt of the written evaluation report by the employee in section D-9.4.3.
Upon the mutual agreement of the Association and the District, an
alternative process to the grievance procedure (Section G) may be used in
resolving issues.
b. If the employee disagrees with the written evaluation report provided in
section G-1, he/she/they may put his/her/their objections in writing within
five (5) working days after receiving the final written evaluation report and
have them attached to the evaluation report. If the evaluation report is being
31
===== page 39 =====
grieved, the five (5) working day time period shall not apply until the
grievance has been resolved or withdrawn.
D-9.6.7 Written Replies
An employee will be informed that he/she/they may attach written replies to
documents he/she/they receive from the evaluator.
D-9.6.8 Effectiveness Ratings
All employees will receive their scores and ratings at the time they receive their evaluations. In
the event that the teacher does not receive such scores and ratings at that time, the district will
assign the employee with a rating of Effective for purposes of reporting and measuring whether
their non- probationary status should be modified.
PUBLIC COMPLAINTS
D-10 COUNSELORS: In the event there are complaints against an employee’s performance and/or
teaching materials, the employee will be informed of such complaints, or charges, and will have
the opportunity to respond before any action is taken.
D-10.1 When possible, conferences with employees will be prearranged. During the
conference, if the employee feels he/she/they needs representation, the employee
may request that the conference be adjourned until representation can be secured.
D-11 EXTRA DUTY FOR EXTRA PAY: No employee shall be disciplined, reprimanded, reduced
in compensation, suspended, or adversely evaluated without just cause. In cases of transfer or
termination state law will apply.
D-11.1 Should any employees be determined to not fall within the meaning of “teacher”,
as that term is defined in the Teacher Employment, Compensation and Dismissal
Act, such employees shall, to the extent the District has such authority, be afforded
the equivalent protections and benefits afforded to teachers under that Act in any
transfer or dismissal.
D-12 EMPLOYEE ASSIGNMENTS: Employees shall be notified in writing of any change in their
tentative assignments for the ensuing school year, including schools to which they will be
assigned, and the grade and/or subject they will teach, and any special or unusual course that
they will have as soon as practicable, and under normal circumstances no later than June 1. If
circumstances prohibit identifying the assignment, the employee shall be notified verbally or
in writing explaining the reasons by May 15.
D-12.1 In arranging schedules for employees who are assigned to more than one school,
the amount of inter-school travel will be held to a minimum. Such employees shall
be notified of any changes in their schedules as soon as practicable. Itinerant
employees who must be required to use their own automobiles in the performance
of their duties and who are assigned to more than one school per day shall be
32
===== page 40 =====
reimbursed for inter-school travel at the current mileage allowance (See Section
E-3). For employees assigned to more than one building, time needed for such
things as travel, lunch, planning, start up and clean up, and other job requirements
shall be allowed for in arranging schedules. Such traveling employees will attend
staff meetings in the building utilizing the greater percentage of the employee’s
time. If such meetings require travel from another building, reimbursement for
such travel will be paid at the current mileage allowance.
D-12.2 In the case of employees employed prior to July 31, the original building
assignment shall be made by the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources
as soon after initial appointment as practicable.
D-12.3 Traveling employees will be given consideration for a full-time assignment in
one school. Program needs may be considered in determining such assignment.
D-13 PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL GROWTH: Both the Association and the District
agree that changes in assignments within or between schools can promote personal growth
and organizational health.
To promote greater voluntary movement of Unit B members, the District and Association
encourage school staff to give consideration to in-district transfer requests when openings
exist. Likewise, the Association, along with the District, encourages members to
periodically review individual career aspirations with principals in context of personal
growth and organizational health.
D-14 TRANSFER: A “transfer” shall mean the movement of an employee from one building to
another for 50% or more of his/her/their assignment.
D-14.1 The voluntary transfer of employees during their probationary period will be
discouraged.
D-14.2 Final determination of assignments shall be made by the Superintendent of Schools
through his/her/their designated representative.
D-15 NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES: A list of all vacancies by position and school,
including those filled by temporary employees, shall be compiled by the Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources and posted at least bi-monthly in all schools from
th st st st
April 15 to June 1 . From June 1 until August 1 , a list of current vacancies shall be
posted weekly in the Human Resources Division. Under normal circumstances, employee
st
initiated transfers will not be permitted after August 1 of each year.
D-15.1 When practicable, the posting(s) will reflect specific requirements,
qualifications, duties and responsibilities.
D-15.2 During the summer months, vacancy notices will be available on the District
website.
D-16 FILLING VACANCIES: In considering employees for transfer to a vacant position, the
33
===== page 41 =====
appropriate administrator will consider the following:
a. Credentials held by applicants including academic preparation, experience,
training and work record.
b. Input from department or grade level employees who will work with the
employee.
c. Skills desired for the position.
When there is more than one applicant for the position in question and all of the
above criteria are essentially equal, priority shall be given to the applicant with
the most seniority in the District.
D-16.1 All qualified in-district, non-probationary applicants will be interviewed unless
more than three (3) apply in which case at least three (3) will be interviewed.
D-17 VOLUNTARY TRANSFER: Members of Unit B may apply online for transfer to another
position when a vacancy is posted through the online application process. When unique
needs or unusual circumstances would seem to require it, a member of Unit B may apply
directly to the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources for special transfer
considerations, even when specific openings are not available or posted.
D-17.1 Vacancies will be posted for a minimum of five (5) business days. The District’s
online system will acknowledge receipt of the application to each applicant once
the employee initiates the application. If the employee desires to know the status
of his/her/their application, or the disposition of the request, the information shall
be provided upon request by the employee. Employees interviewed will receive
notice of the outcome of such interviews as soon as possible after the interviews
are completed. The employee may also request an interview with the principal
and/or Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources for an explanation of the
reason(s) for not being transferred as requested.
D-18 ADMINISTRATIVE TRANSFER: A member of Unit B may be transferred for reasons
other than stated in section D-19 upon the recommendation of the Superintendent of the
School District from one school position or grade level to another within the School District
if such transfer does not result in the assignment of the employee to a position of
employment for which he/she/they is not qualified by virtue of academic preparation and
licensure. Administrative transfers shall not be subject to the mutual consent provisions in
Sec. D-19.
D-18.1 An employee recommended for administrative transfer effective with the beginning
of an academic year will be notified of such recommendation and the reasons
therefore by April 15. Where unforeseen circumstances warrant transfer to another
time, the employee will be so advised promptly after the administrator makes the
recommendation for transfer.
D-18.2 When an employee is recommended for administrative transfer, the employee will
be so notified and be informed of the reason(s) for such proposed action and the
factual support for the reason(s).
34
===== page 42 =====
The employee may meet with the administrator recommending the transfer to
review the proposed action. The employee may have representation present at the
meeting, if he/she/they desires. The reasons for the action, the factual support and
the administrator’s recommendation will be stated in writing.
D-18.3 The employee may request that the Superintendent review the recommendation by
giving written notice to the Superintendent within seven (7) days after receipt of
the administrator’s recommendation. Upon receipt of the request for review, the
Superintendent and a representative of the Association will meet with the
employee and the administrator involved to review the situation. The
Superintendent will consider the concerns of all parties and make a final decision
regarding the transfer.
D-19 INVOLUNTARY TRANSFERS: When it becomes necessary to transfer employees
between schools because of a reduction of staff in a subject area(s) or a grade level(s),
including closure, consolidation, or reconstitution, or because of an actual or projected drop
in enrollment, turnaround, phase-out or reduction in program, the building principal shall
decide in which subject area(s) or grade level(s) such transfer shall occur. The building
principal will seek volunteers in writing from all Unit B employees in the school for transfer
consideration. If there is an insufficient number of volunteers, the principal shall have a
discussion with those most likely to be impacted. In their discussion, the principal shall
inform teachers of their status with regard to the following four factors:
a. Credentials held by employees including academic preparation,
experience, training, and work record and,
b. Building curricular and co-curricular program needs and,
c. Seniority and,
d. Certification of employees by the Colorado Department of Education
Following this meeting, teachers will be given at least three (3) working days to respond.
A teacher who volunteers shall be considered a voluntary administrative transferred teacher
and shall not be considered a displacement and removal subject to any mutual consent
requirements. If the reduction is not accomplished by the transfer of a volunteer, the
building principal will consider the following factors in determining the employee(s) to be
transferred or retained.
D-19.1 If meeting building curricular and co-curricular program needs is the determining
factor, the employee(s) retained must have clearly demonstrated interests or skills
directly related to maintaining the integrity of the programs affected.
D-19.2 Each employee transferred under this provision will be placed in a position for
which he/she/they is qualified provided there is a vacancy. If no vacancy exists,
the provisions of D-20 shall govern.
D-19.3 Employees will be notified in writing no later than April 15 of the selection for
involuntary transfer and/or removal. Where unforeseen circumstances warrant
involuntary transfer during the academic year, employees will be so advised
promptly.
35
===== page 43 =====
D-19.4 Upon written request from the involuntarily placed teacher within the same
building, the principal will work with the teacher to provide support that could
include substitute time for transition and/or funds for needed supplies.
An involuntarily placed teacher, relocated to another building, will receive a
stipend of $500, prorated as per FTE, for supplies and/or transition. Transfers
within the school year will be provided substitute time and additional resources as
determined on a case-by-case basis.
D-19.5 Employees who are involuntarily transferred and/or removed due to a reduction of
staff or a program in a building shall be entitled to return to that building in the
event that their full position or FTE becomes available at that school. This right
of return shall expire at the end of the following school year.
D-19.6 Mutual Consent Placement Team
1. Each building will establish a Mutual Consent Placement Team (MCPT) for the
purpose of making collaborative decision regarding the proposed placement of
any involuntarily transferred and/or displaced employee(s) into their building.
For the purpose of mutual consent, a displaced teacher is defined as any teacher
whose entire FTE in a building is eliminated. Partial loss of FTE in a building
and/or changes in assignment for specialists assigned by the district shall be
considered a reassignment and shall not be considered a displacement and
removal subject to the mutual consent procedures. Involuntarily transferred,
displaced and/or removed teachers will be considered for all vacant positions,
including all limited term and temporary positions, for which they meet the
minimum qualifications prior to any posting or consideration of other internal
or external candidates.
2. The MCPT will consist of the hiring principal and at least two teachers elected
by a secret ballot vote of the faculty to represent them in any decision involving
mutual consent placements. The faculty will determine the number of teachers
to be elected. In the event that a faculty decided to have more than two
representatives, the faculty and the administration will collaboratively decide
how many and which of those representatives will serve on the MCPT for
individual mutual consent decisions. The election results and the collaborative
decision(s) reached at the building shall be shared with HRD and BVEA within
three (3) work days.
3. The district will provide all members of the MCPT with such training so that
they can discharge their duties appropriately and without bias. Members of the
MCPT will be released from their regular duties without loss of compensation
to participate fully in the training and decision making of the MCPT.
4. The MCPT will make their decision regarding mutual consent placement by
consensus using the following criteria:
a. The teacher has the minimum qualifications needed to perform the duties for
36
===== page 44 =====
the position; and
b. The teacher has experience and academic preparation and demonstrates they
support the previously established, written and agreed upon instructional
practices recognized by the faculty. Any member of the MCPT may request
the assistance of BVEA and the District to help facilitate collaborative
decision-making.
The teacher will be notified in writing within 24 hours of the decision on mutual
consent placement with a copy to BVEA and HRD. No representative on the
MCPT will be adversely impacted due to their advocacy and service on the MCPT.
5. No teacher will be denied mutual consent placement without just cause.
6. If a teacher does not secure a mutual consent placement at a building, the district
will advise the teacher of the specific reasons why the teacher was not selected
within two (2) work days. The notice shall include all evidence that was
considered deficient by the MCPT. The teacher shall have the right to appeal
that decision through the grievance procedure starting at Step III and the parties
will expedite the grievance process.
7. Priority Hiring Pool. A teacher who has not secured a mutual consent placement
shall immediately be placed into a priority hiring pool. A teacher in the hiring
pool shall be considered to have applied to the principal and to the district for
any position(s) for which the teacher holds the minimum qualifications.
Teachers in the priority hiring pool will be given the first opportunity to
interview for any vacant position, including temporary and limited term
positions, for which the teacher meets the minimum qualifications. The teacher
will be interviewed in an expedited manner by the MCPT using the procedures
and criteria established by the MCPT. Teachers in the priority hiring pool will
be considered prior to any posting, interviewing or hiring for the position by
either internal or external candidates.
8. In the event a teacher does not secure a mutual consent assignment, HRD will
assign the teacher to a building that has refused to agree to a mutual consent
placement for one year. Within one week of the notice of such assignment, the
principal shall provide the teacher with a written plan that ensures all of the
reasons for denying the mutual consent will be addressed through a systematic
and comprehensive individualized professional development plan. Such plan
will include, but not be limited to:
a. All upcoming professional development opportunities that are available to
the teacher;
b. A statement describing in detail the resources that will be provided the
teacher by the building and district, both in terms of release time and funding
that will ensure the teacher will be able to fully participate in such
professional development opportunities without loss of planning time or
compensation;
c. Direct observation of the teacher’s performance of at least thirty (30)
37
===== page 45 =====
minutes every other week that is preceded by a pre-observation conference
d. Written feedback, within two (2) work days of the observation, that expressly
addresses reasons cited in the denial of mutual consent and whether there has been
progress towards addressing identified deficiencies including concrete, specific
suggestions for what changes must be made by the teacher to overcome the
concerns;
e. The principal shall hold a post observation conference with the teacher
within two (2) work days of the teacher’s receipt of the written feedback;
and
f. A written quarterly review and adjustment of the comprehensive
individualized professional development plan to make such changes as will
ensure the transition to a mutual consent placement at the building by the
end of the year.
D-20 REDUCTION IN FORCE: When it becomes necessary for the Board of Education to
reduce the members of Unit B, the Board of Education shall notify the Association of the
intended reductions and the reasons therefore. As soon as practical after such notification,
representatives of the Board and the Association shall meet to discuss the proposed
reduction in force.
Should any employees be determined to not fall within the meaning of “teacher”, as that
term is defined in the Teacher Employment, Compensation and Dismissal Act, such
employees shall, to the extent the District has such authority, be afforded the equivalent
protections and benefits afforded to teachers under that Act in any reduction in force action.
D-20.1 Announcement of the probable number of elementary and secondary employees to
be affected by the contemplated reduction in force will be made no later than
March 15 of the school year. Announcement of the classifications and probable
numbers to be affected will be made no later than May 15 of the school year.
Notification of specific employees affected by the reduction in force will contain
the reason(s) for such reduction and will be made as soon as possible.
D-20.2 If the Board votes to reduce the number of employees, after consideration of
Affirmative Action guidelines, the provisions of state law, and qualifications,
reduction in force will occur in the following order:
a. Normal attrition (retirements and resignations)
b. Volunteers to take a leave of absence
c. Termination of probationary employees with strong consideration given to
the inverse order of seniority and program needs
d. Termination of employees as outlined in D-20.3
D-20.3 The following procedure will apply for the reduction of employees:
a. Employees with the least seniority in the classification affected will be the
first to be removed
b. An employee removed under (a) will displace the employee with the least
seniority in a similar job classification within the District
38
===== page 46 =====
c. An employee who cannot displace another employee in a similar job
classification because he/she/they does not have sufficient seniority will
displace the employee with the least seniority within the District whose
assignment he/she/they is qualified to perform, and
d. An employee displaced by another employee under this procedure shall
follow the same procedure in displacing another employee
e. An employee displaced under (d) will not be considered to be subject to the
mutual consent provisions of this Agreement.
D-20.4 The following procedures will apply for employees who have been reduced:
D-20.4.1 At the request of the building, a non renewed probationary employee may
be rehired by his/her/their former school without going through the
interview process. In the event a non renewed probationary employee is
not rehired by his/her/their former school, he/she/they will be
interviewed for vacancies for which he/she/they has the qualifications.
All qualified non renewal probationary employees will be interviewed
unless more than three (3) are qualified in which case at least three (3)
will be interviewed. Non Renewal probationary employees not selected
for rehire may request a meeting with the appropriate District
administrator to review the employee’s concerns.
D-20.4.2 Non-probationary employees will be recalled for position vacancies for
which these employees have the required qualification. Employees will
be recalled according to seniority unless program needs dictate
otherwise.
D-20.4.3 Reduced employees who wish to be considered for reemployment will
provide written notification to the Assistant Superintendent of Human
Resources, which will include area(s) of qualification, position desired,
address and telephone number. Such information must be kept current
by the employees so affected.
D-20.4.4 A non-probationary employee reduced in section D-20.3 who can become
qualified for a vacancy which is identified prior to June 1 shall be given
priority over a new hire in filling such vacancy provided he/she/they
becomes qualified for the position on or before August 15, prior to the
ensuing school year. The employee will submit a letter of interest stating
his/her/their plan, including timelines for becoming qualified in the
identified area(s). It is understood that upon completion of the
qualification requirements, a contract will be offered to the employee for
the ensuing school year. Tuition reimbursement provisions (E-44) will
apply.
D-20.5 Non-probationary employees who are offered reemployment in section D-20.4.2
will have fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of notification to accept or
reject the offer. Non-probationary employees will forfeit their recall rights for
reemployment if the offer of reemployment is rejected or if they fail to respond
39
===== page 47 =====
within fourteen (14) calendar days.
D-20.6 Reduction in force employees will retain accumulated leave status (providing
reimbursement for accumulated leave has not been made), position on the salary
schedule, employee status, and shall also have the option to maintain medical and
life insurance at their own expense for a period not to exceed two years.
D-20.7 No new employees will be hired for a period of two years unless all non-
probationary employees who were reduced as provided in section D-20.3 have
been given the opportunity to fill openings for which they have the necessary
qualifications.
D-20.8 For two years after being laid off employees who have been laid off will be given
priority in substitute assignments for positions for which they are qualified, except
where a specific substitute is requested by the classroom employee or
administration. The sole remedy for a failure to call an employee for a substitute
assignment shall be the granting of an alternate assignment when it becomes
available.
D-21 QUALIFICATIONS: In the exercise of seniority in a reduction in force, the employee must
have the qualifications necessary to perform the assignment involved. Qualifications shall
include licensure by the Colorado Department of Education or equivalent, and specific job
qualifications and training where they are established prerequisites of the District. In cases
when seniority considerations or an employee’s qualifications, personal or professional, are
questioned, representatives of the Association and the employee concerned shall meet with
the appropriate District administrator and the Assistant Superintendent of Human
Resources to discuss the question. The employee will be subsequently notified of the
decision by the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources.
D-22 SUBSTITUTES: A list of qualified substitutes shall be available at all times during the
school year and shall be provided to the building principal for his/her/their and faculty use.
Teachers may recommend to the Human Resources Division, from the approved list, the
name of a specific substitute as a replacement during their absence. If that substitute is
available, the Human Resources Division will honor that request.
D-23 STUDENT TEACHERS: After consultation with the principal, an employee may refuse
the assignment of a student teacher if, in the employee’s judgment, his/her/their classes will
suffer from having a student teacher.
D-24 ADMINISTRATIVE POSITIONS: Employees shall be included in the selection of
building administrators as described in Board policy.
D-24.1 Lateral transfer of building administrators is exempt from this provision, however,
committee recommendations are advisable.
D-25 LEARNING MATERIALS: Learning materials that require Board approval shall be
evaluated by a committee prior to adoption. The number of persons on the committee shall
be determined by the Area Superintendent. At least two-thirds of the members shall be
employees in the appropriate subject areas. The remaining members may be appointed by
the Deputy Superintendent.
40
===== page 48 =====
D-25.1 Reference and supplementary materials may also be evaluated by a committee if
the Deputy Superintendent determines it is advisable.
D-25.2 The Board may accept or reject the learning materials selected by the evaluation
committees or ask for further recommendations.
D-26 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: The Board of Education and the Association agree to
a continuation and an expansion of the present policy of involving employees in curriculum
development.
D-26.1 Released time and/or payment for such work shall be provided at the Curriculum
Development rate.
D-26.2 New programs and curricular changes will be preceded by appropriate in-service
education of employees. Materials and equipment to support such programs will
be provided before the new program is scheduled to begin.
D-27 PERFORMANCE CONTRACTING: The Board of Education agrees that no organization
or individual(s) will be employed to provide any student instruction which would result in
the dismissal of any employee now employed.
D-28 SALARY NOTIFICATION CHANGES: The Human Resources Division will provide all
Unit B employees with a checklist of any items needed for their personnel file. This list will
be initiated by a personnel clerk as each item is received. An incomplete checklist will
constitute a reason for withholding a paycheck.
D-28.1 If any employee has not been notified as provided in D-29, the employee shall
receive a paycheck as soon as possible.
D-28.2 Each Unit B employee shall receive a letter or other written notification prior to a
salary change explaining how the salary under each new contract or column
change is to be computed; such letter or other written notification to be in the
hands of the teacher at least one week prior to the effective pay date.
D-29 EMPLOYEE EXCHANGE
D-29.1 Employees interested in exchanges with other employees in Boulder Valley School
District shall first discuss their interest with their principal or supervisor. No later
than February 15, employees shall notify the Human Resources Division of their
interest for an exchange for the ensuing school year.
D-29.2 Employees considering an exchange must hold the appropriate licensure and/or
credentials for the positions desired.
D-29.3 The Human Resources Division will complete all requests and provide the
information to each school for posting no later than March 1.
41
===== page 49 =====
D-29.4 After discussing the potential exchange with the principal or supervisor, employees
are responsible for contacting other employees interested in an exchange.
D-29.5 An exchange proposal, using the appropriate form, must be filed with the Human
Resources Division no later than April 15. The proposal shall include the requests
of the employees and the support of the building principals involved in the
exchange.
D-29.6 Exchanges will be normally limited to one year. Extensions may be requested for
an additional year or for a permanent exchange of assignment. Such requests shall
include the written support of the employees and the building principals involved
in the exchange.
D-30 LIMITED TERM/TEMPORARY CONTRACT
Limited term/temporary contracts may be used for employment of probationary employees
at the careful discretion of the administration. Under normal circumstances their primary
uses include:
1. Contractual arrangements for all individuals employed in less than .50 FTE.
2. Contractual arrangements for individuals employed to replace a member of
UnitB who is on a leave of absence.
3. Contractual arrangements for members of Unit B employed on or after the first
day of the school year.
4. Contractual arrangements for members of Unit B employed to serve in a
specially funded project and/or pilot program.
When limited term/temporary contracts are used the following condition shall govern:
1. An employee employed on a limited term/temporary contract will have
his/her/their employment expire at the end of the term set forth in his/her/their
contract. An employee so employed will waive the right to automatic renewal
unless he/she/they is completing his/her/their third year of qualified
employment. An employee on a limited term/temporary contract will receive
non-renewal notice at the end of the third year of employment.
2. Time accumulated by an employee employed pursuant to a limited
term/temporary contract will count for the acquisition of teacher status, provided
that such accumulated time would otherwise qualify the employee for teacher
status under state law.
3. Once an employee receives a regular contract, his/her/their seniority shall originate
from the date the employee first reported to work, including the time on a limited
term/temporary contract, provided the employee was employed for at least .50 FTE
contract and the service is not interrupted.
42
===== page 50 =====
4. Positions held by limited term/temporary employees will be posted according
to the provisions in D-15.
Employees who are hired under limited term contracts and who distinguish
themselves by outstanding performance as reflected in their formal written
evaluation reports, shall receive priority consideration for regular teaching
positions in the District when compared to other limited term contract
employees and new hires.
SECTION E: COMPENSATION
*The MOU, “Compensation: Revised Salary Schedule 2026” on pages 106-107 supersedes relevant
language in this section *
E-1 COMPENSATION RATE: All Unit B employees shall have their salary determined from the
employees’ salary schedule. The salary provided in the index appropriate for education and experience
shall be for the 186 day contract (C-3). Each day of work in excess of 186 days shall be compensated
at 1/186 of the annual salary (provided for the 186 days) per day. Hourly rate shall be compensated at
the daily rate divided by 7 except as otherwise established in the Agreement.
E-1.1 To address dynamic school funding models at the state and federal level, the Boulder
Employees eligible to move vertically in the white cells who worked or were on paid leave
for at least 90 days in the previous school year will advance one vertical step effective on
the first work day of the school year and will advance horizontally as provided therein.
The District will maintain a Section 125 Medical Flexible Spending Account between
January 1 and December 31 of each contract year. Open enrollment will be held
November 1-30. Employees who are active on November 30 and complete an
enrollment form by November 30, will receive a dollar for dollar matching
contribution up to a maximum of $120 from the District on the January payroll.
E-1.2 Restrictions on movement within the Salary Schedule and Yellow Cell Schedule:
New hires are not eligible for placement or movement onto the Yellow Cell Schedule.
a. Employees on the Yellow Cell Schedule will not advance vertically but may
advance horizontally to any column except for the BA+48 column.
b. Any employee on the Yellow Cell Schedule will move onto the Salary
Schedule if their horizontal advancement results in placement in a cell on
the Salary Schedule.
E-1.3 Guidelines for outside experience: It is the intent of the parties that to the degree
possible new hires will be placed on Step A of the Salary Schedule. However, the
district will have the flexibility to offer prospective employees placement at a
higher step up to the middle of the schedule. Placement beyond the middle of the
schedule will require consultation with BVEA.
E-2 PAY PERIODS: Employees will be paid their salary in twelve (12) monthly installments on the
last business day of each month. All Unit B employees will receive their first paycheck on the last
business day in August and their last paycheck on the last business day in July beginning with the
43
===== page 51 =====
2010-2011 contract year.
STIPENDS
E-3 MILEAGE: Employees required to use their own automobile, as discussed in Section D- 12.1,
shall be reimbursed at the IRS Standard Mileage Rate.
E-4 CLASSROOM COVERAGE: Assignment to classroom vacancies as discussed in Section C-13
shall be compensated at the rate of .000656 of base salary (Lane A) per hour or major fraction of an
hour, known as curriculum rate.
E-5 CREDIT HOURS: Credit for training as shown on the salary schedules in the Agreement is based
on semester hours.
E-6 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: Compensation is determined on the basis of an hourly rate
of .000656 of base salary (Lane A).
E-7 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RATE: Compensation is determined on the basis of an
hourly rate of .000719 of base salary (Lane A).
E-8 NATIONAL BOARD CERTIFICATION
E-8.1 Employees who complete the necessary requirements and are certified through the
National Board Certification program will receive a five percent (5%) stipend. Such stipend
will be effective the semester following submission of certification to the Human Resources
Division and will be paid in equal monthly installments.
E-8.2 BVSD Employees who earned their ASHA Certificate of Clinical Competence and
were hired prior to July 31, 2017 will continue to receive a five percent (5%)
stipend as long as they are assigned to an SLP position and they maintain this
certification.
E-8.3 Effective August 1, 2021, Employees in possession of National Association of School
Psychologists (NASP) or National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC)
certification shall receive an annual stipend equal to 2.5% of the Employee’s
annual salary. Effective August 1, 2022, Employees so certified shall receive an
additional 2.5% stipend, thereby totaling a 5% stipend for the abovementioned
certifications.
E-8.4 In order to be eligible for the certifications in E-8.1 and E-8.3, Employees shall be
non-probationary. Coursework required for the above certifications shall not be
creditable for horizontal movement on the salary schedule. Any current
Employees pursuing the above mentioned certifications as of June 1, 2021 shall
be held harmless from these provisions.
E-8.5 Employees with one of the above certifications shall remain in good standing with
their professional practice. In the event that an Employee so certified is placed on
Level II of the evaluation process (see Sec. D-9 et seq), the stipend may be
suspended until the Employee returns to Level One.
44
===== page 52 =====
E-8.6 Employees with one of the above certifications shall be expected to occupy and
remain in a job classification related to the pertinent certification. Employees who
voluntarily transfer out of such a position may be subject to removal of the stipend.
E-8.7 BVEA and HRD shall review such cases and provide written notice to Employees
impacted by Sec. E-8.5 and E-8.6.
E-9 TEACHER LIBRARIANS: Teacher librarians shall work a contract year of 186 days. In
addition, each librarian may be granted up to four additional days to be arranged by the
principal in cooperation with the librarian and with the approval of the appropriate District
administrator.
E-10 COUNSELORS: Counselors who are full-time employees and who are assigned to
counseling fifty percent or more of their time shall work the counselors’ work year and work
day and be paid on the 196-day schedule. Full-time employees whose counseling assignment
is less than fifty percent shall have their work year, work day and salary prorated for actual
counseling and teaching time.
E-11 EXTRA PAY FOR EXTRA DUTY: Extra pay for extra duties and responsibilities shall
be provided in accordance with the extra pay for extra duty schedule providing that such
duties and responsibilities are in addition to a full teaching assignment. Employees with
released time or class time to assume assigned responsibilities will not be entitled to extra duty
pay. Certification of employees contracted for extra duty shall be by the building principal and
the appropriate District administrator. Extra pay is determined by the extra duty assignment
and the years of service in the assignment.
E-11.1 The minimum extra pay allowance (Step 1) for extra duty is computed by
multiplying the stated percentage by the base salary of $35,218. Steps two through
eight are computed by multiplying the stated percentage by the dollar amounts in
two through eight in the BA column of the employee’s salary schedule of the
2011-12 contract with the new base salary of $35,218. The eight steps are
experience steps.
E-11.2 Employees newly appointed to an extra duty assignment shall be placed on step one.
Employees already employed in an extra duty assignment will be placed on the
appropriate experience step. Experience in another extra pay assignment or in
another school district does not apply.
E-11.3 Extra pay for extra duty may, under certain circumstances, be prorated between
employees. Under no circumstance will a proration of less than .01 be permitted.
E-11.4 JOB TITLE LENGTH OF ASSIGNMENT INDEX
Senior High Athletics
Head Football Coach per season .111
Assistant Football Coach per season .074
45
===== page 53 =====
Head Basketball Coach per season .111
Assistant Basketball Coach per season .074
Head Track Coach per season .084
Assistant Track Coach per season .063
Head Wrestling Coach per season .084
Assistant Wrestling Coach per season .063
Head Baseball Coach per season .084
Assistant Baseball Coach per season .063
Head Softball Coach per season .084
Assistant Softball Coach per season .063
Head Ski Coach per season .084
Assistant Ski Coach per season .063
Head Soccer Coach per season .084
Assistant Soccer Coach per season .063
Head Gymnastics Coach per season .074
Assistant Gymnastics Coach per season .053
Head Swimming Coach per season .074
Assistant Swimming Coach per season .053
Head Volleyball Coach per season .084
Assistant Volleyball Coach per season .063
Head Cross Country Coach per season .074
Assistant Cross Country Coach per season .053
Head Tennis Coach per season .063
Assistant Tennis Coach per season .040
Head Golf Coach per season .063
Assistant Golf Coach per season .040
Coaches whose teams qualify for and participate in a recognized CHSAA State
Play-Offs or Championships beyond the regular schedule of league play-offs
shall receive a percentage of season extra duty pay for each week that a team is
involved in post season competition. Only competitions that occur outside the
regular extra duty contract period will qualify for extra pay.
Senior High Activities
Yearbook Sponsor
-Schools with enrollment over 1000 50 hours after school .100
-Schools with enrollment under 1000 50 hours after school .069
Newspaper Sponsor 50 hours after school .069
Choir Director 50 hours after school .058
Assistant Choir Director 50 hours after school .027
Director of Musical 50 hours after school .080
Assistant Director of Musical 50 hours after school .027
46
===== page 54 =====
Stage Technician Assistant (musical) 50 hours after school .035
Marching Band Director 50 hours after school .069
Assistant Marching Band Director 50 Hours after school .027
Color Guard 50 hours after school .027
Percussion Instructor 50 hours after school .027
Band Director 50 hours after school .058
Assistant Band Director 50 hours after school .027
Orchestra Director Forensics Director 50 hours after school .042
11 or more meets per year .058
6-10 meets per year .042
Director of Full-Length Play 50 hours after school .069
Assistant Director of Full-Length Play 50 hours after school .027
Stage Technician Assistant (Play) 50 hours after school .035
One-Act/Talent Show Play Director per production .021
Student Council Sponsor 50 hours after school .048
Career & Tech Ed Student 50 hours after school .048
Organization Sponsor
Thespian Sponsor 50 hours after school .048
Student Activity Director 50 hours after school .032
National Technical Honor 50 hours after school .032
Society Sponsor
Senior Class Sponsor per year .021
Junior Class Sponsor per year .021
Sophomore Class Sponsor per year .011
Freshman Class Sponsor per year .011
360 Sponsor per year .032
Spirit Sponsor (Chrldr/Pom Pon) per season .063
Intramurals 40 hour program .029
Marching Band directors and Assistants who are expected to accompany athletic
teams to recognized CHSAA State Play-Offs or Championships beyond the
regular schedule of league play-off shall receive a percentage of their extra duty
pay for each week that the marching band is involved in post season competition.
Directors and Sponsors whose student groups qualify for recognized CHSAA
State competitions shall receive a percentage of their extra duty pay for each
week that the student group is involved in the post season competition. Only
competitions that occur outside the regular extra duty contract period will qualify
for extra pay.
Middle Level Athletics
Head Football Coach per season .059
Assistant Football Coach per season .040
47
===== page 55 =====
Head Basketball Coach per season .048
Assistant Basketball Coach per season .032
Head Volleyball Coach per season .048
Assistant Volleyball Coach per season .032
Head Softball Coach per season .048
Assistant Softball Coach per season .032
Head Wrestling Coach per season .048
Assistant Wrestling Coach per season .032
Head Track Coach per season .048
Assistant Track Coach per season .032
Middle Level Activities
Yearbook Sponsor 40 hours after school .037
Newspaper Sponsor 40 hours after school .032
Choir Director 40 hours after school .048
Director of Musical 40 hours after school .042
Assistant Director of Musical 40 hours after school .011
Band Director 40 hours after school .048
Orchestra Director 40 hours after school .037
Director of Full-Length Play 40 hours after school .042
Assistant Director of Full-Length Play 40 hours after school .011
One-Act Play Director per play .011
Student Council Sponsor 40 hours after school .032
Elementary Level Activities
Elementary schools will be allocated extra duty time on a prorated basis as
determined by student enrollment. The extra duty time will be paid at the rate of
.03 of the BA salary for a 40-hour program. The use of these hours will be determined
through shared decision making. The activities which may be considered are:
a. Choir Director
b. School Newspaper sponsor
c. Student Council sponsor
d. Intramurals
e. Director of Play
f. Director of Musical
g. Conflict Mediation Supervisor
h. Club Sponsor
i. Other duties, as deemed appropriate
E-12 DEPARTMENT CHAIRPERSON AND OUTDOOR EDUCATION: Chairpersons
who do not receive released time as provided in C-10 may be compensated as follows: If, in
addition to the department chairperson there is one, two or three persons
- $400; four persons - $450; five persons - $500; six persons - $550; seven persons - $600;
eight persons - $650; nine persons - $700; ten persons - $750; eleven persons - $800;
49
===== page 56 =====
twelve or more persons - $850. (“persons” means FTE or major fraction thereof.)
Team leaders will receive a compensation of $750.
Employees responsible for the supervision of students in an outdoor education program
who remain overnight shall receive sixty-five (65) dollars per night. This amount shall be
in addition to the employee’s regular pay and shall apply only to employees designated by
the building administrator.
E-13 QUALIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF VOCATIONAL-TECHNICAL
CENTER EMPLOYEES:
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS: Instructors in Vocational and Technical Education must
meet the requirements for Vocational Credential for the particular field of training as
determined by the Colorado State Board for Community Colleges and Occupational
Education.
E-13.1 Vocational-Technical Center Instructors without a Bachelor’s Degree will be
encouraged to work toward a Bachelor’s Degree and complete all courses as
required by the State Vocational Plan of the Colorado Board for Community
Colleges and Occupational Education.
E-13.2 All Vocational-Technical instructors will be required to meet in-service training
requirements and to complete the necessary studies to keep their credentials
and/or teaching licenses in force.
E-13.3 SALARY REQUIREMENTS
A Vocational-Technical Center instructor will start at the index location on the Vocational-
Technical Center salary schedule that corresponds with his/her/their level of academic
achievement and years of teaching experience, plus additional index points for work experience.
The Vocational-Technical Center instructor shall be given credit for outside teaching experience
up through five years.
1. Additional work days beyond the 186 day contract year for Vocational-
Technical Center instructors and 196 day contract year for Vocational-
Technical Center counselors shall be compensated on the basis of their regular
salary computed on a daily basis.
2. Instruction by a Vocational-Technical Center instructor in curriculum
development shall be compensated at the rate as provided in Section E-5.
3. Released time needed for Vocational-Technical Center instructors to visit high
schools, vocational-technical schools, and businesses shall be approved within
normal District guidelines.
4. Department Chairpersons in the Vocational-Technical Center will receive a
yearly amount of $125.00 for each full-time employee or full-time equivalent
in the Department including the Chairperson. The extra pay is to compensate
50
===== page 57 =====
for time required “outside” of regular school hours in carrying out
responsibilities assigned by the Vocational-Technical Center principal. A full-
time employee or equivalent is considered an employee with a total of six (6)
periods of assigned classes daily.
5. The Vocational-Technical Center instructor will be compensated for
his/her/their applicable work experience above the bachelor’s degree or for a
non-degree instructor above two years of work experience.
6. Partial years of ninety (90) or more teaching days of such experience shall be
counted as full years of experience in giving outside experience.
E-14 GROUP INSURANCE MEDICAL, DENTAL, AND LIFE INSURANCE: The
District will pay the full employee premium for eligible employees for Medical and Dental
plans recommended by the Benefits Committee and approved by the Board of Education.
From July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2022, the District shall pay 100% of the employee-
only premium for eligible employees for plans provided by the District’s group medical
and dental insurance carriers that are recommended by the Benefits Committee and
approved by the Board of Education. Applicable dependent premiums shall be paid
through the payroll deduction process.
In order to keep dependent care rates from increasing for the 21-22 school year, from July 1,
2022, through June 30, 2023, the district shall pay 100% of the employee-only premium for the
lowest cost plan provided by the district’s group medical insurance carrier for eligible
employees. Employees who select a higher cost plan shall pay $25 per month (12 month plan).
Premiums shall be paid through the payroll deduction process.
For 2019-2020 and 2020-2021, the District paid premium will be increased by a maximum
of up to the lesser amount of:
● Two(2) times the Denver-Aurora-Lakewood CPI used for determining
inflation under Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution or;
● 5%
The District shall pay the employee-only premium for the plan provided by the District’s
group dental insurance carrier for eligible employees. Applicable dependent premiums
shall be paid by the employee through the payroll deduction process.
The District agrees to contribute the approved amounts for June and July for covered
employees who are working or are on leave covered under the Family and Medical Leave
Act (FMLA) or paid non-FMLA qualifying medical leave, on their last scheduled work
day of the school year. Employees are still responsible for paying their applicable premium
contributions.
The District will provide group life and accidental death and dismemberment coverage for
eligible employees at no cost to the employee.
E-14.1 EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP): The District will provide an
51
===== page 58 =====
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) with counseling services for eligible
employees at no cost to the employee.
E-15 LONG TERM DISABILITY INSURANCE: The District will provide group long term
disability coverage for eligible employees at no cost to the employee.
E-16 PLAN CONTENTS: The contents of the Medical, Dental, and Long-Term Disability
plans shall be mutually agreed upon by the Association and the Board of Education.
E-17 WORKERS COMPENSATION AND EMPLOYER’S LIABILITY INSURANCE
POLICY: A workers’ compensation and employers’ liability insurance policy in the usual
form shall be purchased by the Boulder Valley School District. Employees of the District
acting within the course and scope of their employment shall be insured under the policy.
A copy of this policy shall be provided to the Association.
E-18 BENEFITS COMMITTEE: During the term of this Agreement, the Benefits Committee
shall meet and confer regarding general contractual insurance matters. The District Insurance
Consultant may be requested to attend such meetings. The Benefits Committee will make
decisions by consensus.
E-19 PERA AND WORKER’S COMPENSATION: PERA and Worker’s Compensation as
established by the statutes of the State of Colorado shall be provided members of Unit B by
the Boulder Valley School District.
E-20 ANNUAL LEAVE
E-20.1 Effective with the 1996-97 work year, annual leave days will not accrue from one
year to the next except as provided in section E-21.2. Each full-time contracted
employee shall be allocated twelve (12) days of annual leave at the beginning of
the current contract year. An employee’s annual leave will be deducted by eight
(8) hours for each full day’s absence. Partial day absences shall be deducted in
hourly increments according to the number of hours absent.
E-20.1.1 An employee who is hired to work less than 186 days in a school year
or who has less than a full time assignment shall receive annual leave
on a pro-rata basis.
E-20.1.2 A part-time employee may have an assignment for partial days. For
those employees, annual leave will be deducted by the number of hours
absent from assigned duties. Alternately, a part-time employee may be
assigned three or four days per week. For those employees, eight (8)
hours of annual leave will be deducted for each full day’s absence.
E-20.1.3 In the event that an employee’s contract is terminated prior to the
termination date stated on the contract and the employee has used more
days than he/she/they has accrued, an hourly pro-rata reduction will be
made on the final paycheck to the employee, except in cases of death or
other such circumstances beyond the control of the employee.
52
===== page 59 =====
E-20.2 Annual leave days will accumulate up to a maximum of 25 days beyond the 12
days accrued each year. By June 1 of each year, each employee who wishes to
be paid for up to 12 annual leave days shall designate in writing on the
appropriate school district form the number of unused days to be paid that
contract year. Otherwise, the annual leave days will accumulate up to a maximum
of 25 days. Any annual days above 25 at the end of the school year will be
automatically paid in July.
Upon separation from the district, an employee will be paid up to a maximum
of 37 annual leave days.
E-20.3 Each July, each employee shall receive a payment at the starting substitute teacher
daily rate for all annual leave days paid as defined in E-20.2. Annual leave days
that are included in the July payment are not carried over to the next contract
year.
E-20.4 An employee intending to use annual leave shall notify the school district’s
substitute calling system at least five (5) days prior, when possible, to the day(s)
on which such leave is taken.
E-20.5 An employee who exhausts his/her/their annual leave may, at the discretion of the
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources or designee, be granted additional
days of leave without pay. Extended leaves of absence may be requested under
sections E-29 through E-38.
E-20.6 Except as provided in section E-21.3, the accrued sick leave balance for each
employee will be frozen at the level in place as of June 7, 1996. An employee
who resigns, retires or is reduced in force on or after June 7, 1996, will receive
payment for the frozen unused sick leave days as follows:
Years of Full-time Service Rate Paid for Each Day
as of June 7, 1996 Accrued as of June 7,
1996
0-15 $48.86
16-20 $61.08
21-25 $73.30
26 and above $91.62
E-20.6.2 In the event of death of an employee, payment of accumulated sick leave shall
be made to the employee’s estate.
E-20.7 An employee may use frozen accumulated leave days from his/her/their accrued
frozen sick leave balance as provided in section E-21.5 subject to the following
conditions:
1. Frozen sick leave may be used only after all accumulated leave is exhausted
pursuant to section E-21.5.
53
===== page 60 =====
2. Frozen sick leave days may be used for the illness for oneself or for
maternity/parental leave or for the illness or death of a member of one’s
immediate family as defined in section E-24.
Other Provisions:
E-20.8 An employee on an extended leave of absence without pay will retain his/her/their
accumulated leave as provided in section E-34 but will not accrue further leave
until he/she/they returns to work on paid status.
E-20.9 When an employee chooses to contribute a day(s) to the Sick Leave Bank as
provided for in section E-22, such day(s) will be subtracted from the annual leave
days in section E-21.2 and will not be subtracted from the accrued sick leave days
as provided for in section E-21.6.
E-20.10 An employee will have annual leave deducted based upon the number of hours
absent from work. An employee must count a planning period the same as an
instruction period when absent from work.
E-20.11 RELIGIOUS HOLIDAY LEAVE In addition to using annual leave, an employee may use
up to three (3) days of leave to observe religious holidays which occur on regularly scheduled work
days, provided such days are made up by arrangement with the respective principals and are used for
regular job-related activities.
E-21 SICK LEAVE BANK
E-21.1 A sick leave bank will be established as of September 1, 1996. All employees shall
be eligible to participate on a voluntary basis. E-21.2 An employee has the option
of enrolling in the Bank during the open enrollment period from the first contract
day of each year through September 15, or for employees hired after September
1, during the first ten days of that employee’s contract. To be enrolled in the Bank
for that contract year, each employee will donate one (1) day of his/her/their
annual leave to the Bank.
E-22.2.1 An employee who works less than 186 days in a school year or who has less than
a full-time assignment shall donate and receive Bank days on a pro-rata
basis.
E-21.3 Days donated to the Bank in section E-22.2 will be considered in the Bank as of
the first scheduled work day of each school year.
E-21.4 An employee may withdraw from membership in the Bank between the first
contract day each year through September 15, by designating such in writing on
the appropriate school district form. An employee will not be able to withdraw
any days which such employee has previously contributed.
E-21.5 Any employee applying for Sick Leave Bank benefits must have used at least
twenty-five (25) consecutive leave days prior to making application. Such leave
may consist of annual leave days, frozen accumulated sick leave days as defined
54
===== page 61 =====
in section E-21. Provided the employee is ill or injured, and/or leave without pay.
E-21.6 Any remainder of the employee’s accumulated annual leave days and/or frozen
accumulated sick leave days as defined in section E-21.2 will be the employee’s
new balance.
E-21.7 A maximum of fifteen (15) days each contract year can be drawn by a full-time
employee from the Bank in addition to the employee’s own accumulated annual
leave days if any. Less than full-time employee’s days will be prorated
accordingly.
E-21.8 An employee who is authorized leave days from the Bank will not be required to
replace such days except as a regular contributing member of the Bank.
E-21.9 Leave days can only be authorized from the Bank for an employee’s illness or
injury. Days will not be granted for an employee to care for someone else who is
ill or disabled or for non-contracted days or days in which workers’ compensation
is available to the employee.
E-21.10 A request for authorization of Bank days must be accompanied by a statement
from a qualified physician certifying that the employee is unable to fulfill the
employee’s contractual obligations and explaining the medical reasons therefore.
E-21.11 Each full-time employee enrolling in the Bank will donate one day of such
employee’s own annual leave to the Bank each September 1, until the Bank has
accumulated 1500 days. Thereafter, no more days will be added until the Bank is
depleted to 500 days except for days to be donated by new members which may
be added to the Bank at any time.
E-21.12 Any variances from this “SICK LEAVE BANK” section shall be by the Sick
Leave Bank Committee. The Committee shall consist of three (3) Unit B
employees appointed by the Association and three (3) persons from the
administrative staff appointed by the Superintendent.
E-21.12.1 Decisions of the Sick Leave Bank Committee shall be final and binding and not
grievable.
E-22 INJURY LEAVE
Injury leave may be granted to protect an employee against temporary loss of salary when
he/she/they sustains an injury arising out of, or in the course of, the actual performance of
his/her/their job. Such injuries may entitle an employee to benefits under the Workers’
Compensation Act.
E-22.1 In order to receive these benefits, injured employees are required to report the injury
without delay to their immediate supervisor; report to a duly qualified physician
and have a verification of the injury made to the District; and file an application
for Workers’ Compensation benefits within two working days in the Benefits
Department.
55
===== page 62 =====
E-22.2 In the event of an on-the-job injury to the employee, which is deemed compensable
under the Workers’ Compensation Law, the employee will continue to receive
compensation that the employee otherwise would have normally earned for up to
three (3) days. Such absence will not be charged to annual leave. In those cases
where the insurance carrier assumes liability, the injured employee may,
beginning with the fourth day of absence due to such injury, receive his/her/their
full salary from the School District less the amount of any workers’ compensation
pay received for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) working days. In such
case, the absence would not be charged to the employee’s annual leave.
E-22.3 After the end of the described thirty (30) working days, the employee has two
options:
1. He/she/they may use accumulated annual leave and be paid at his/her/their full
salary less the amount of Workers’ Compensation pay. In such cases the
absence is charged against the employee’s accumulated annual leave on a
prorated basis.
2. He/she/they may accept only Workers’ Compensation pay in which case annual
leave will not be charged.
E-22.4 In cases where the insurance carrier fails to assume any liability, all absences may
be charged under the regular annual leave provisions.
E-23 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE:
When death occurs in an employee’s immediate family, he/she/they shall be granted three
(3) working days off with pay for the time lost from work. In the event an employee needs
to travel out-of-state, an additional two (2) days of bereavement leave will be granted. The
definition of “immediate family” as used here shall be interpreted to include husband, wife,
son, son-in-law, daughter, daughter-in-law, father, father-in-law, mother, mother-in-law,
sister, sister-in- law, brother, brother-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren of employee,
domestic partner or any relative living in the immediate household of the employee. Any
additional days will be charged to accumulated annual leave, frozen sick leave and/or leave
without pay.
E-23.1 In unique circumstances, an employee may appeal to the Assistant Superintendent
of Human Resources for a variance of the provision. Decisions of the Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources shall be final and binding and not grievable.
MISCELLANEOUS SHORT ABSENCES
E-24 TIME OFF TO VOTE: Employees who are qualified to vote will be given time off, without
loss of pay, for the purpose of voting. Arrangements for such absences must be made in
advance with the employee’s immediate supervisor.
E-25 JURY DUTY: Employees who are ordered to serve on jury duty will be granted time off with
56
===== page 63 =====
pay for court appearances.
E-26 COURT APPEARANCES:
E-26.1 Employees who are subpoenaed to appear in court on a matter that involves the
employee’s capacity as a District employee shall be granted time off with pay for
court appearances.
E-26.2 Employees who are subpoenaed to appear in court as witnesses shall be granted
time off with pay upon presentation of court notice for such appearance(s).
E-26.3 Time off for court appearances on personal legal matters may be charged to annual
leave. If more than an employee’s available annual leave is needed, the
employee shall pay for the substitute time needed. Annual leave need not be
used for absences less than one-half day if arrangements are made with fellow
employees as provided in C-13.
E-27 MILITARY LEAVE
E-27.1 MILITARY SERVICE: Any employee who is unable to perform the terms of an
employment contract because of entry into military service as defined by the
Selective Service Act of 1967, should notify the Human Resources Division,
inwriting, immediately upon receiving orders to report for military duty. Copies
of such orders shall be submitted to the Human Resources Division. An employee
who applies for reinstatement within the time period provided by law will be
reinstated.
E-27.2 MILITARY TRAINING LEAVE: Employees belonging to the Guard or Reserve
Units will be allowed to take up to fifteen (15) calendar days per year of time off
from their regular duties for such military training. A leave not to exceed fifteen
(15) calendar days per year shall be without any loss of pay provided that the
employee on such military leave shall turn over to the District payment received
for such services.
E-27.3 MILITARY LEAVE: Employees of the District who are members of the National
Guard or the military reserves who are called to active military service will be
entitled to continuation of District insurance coverage on the same basis as they
had prior to the call to service with the District making the same contribution as
for other employees in the service-member’s classification for a period of ninety
(90) calendar days, or the duration of their military service, whichever is shorter.
Such employees will also receive the difference between their military pay and
their District pay for a period of ninety (90) calendar days for the period of service
in the military, whichever is shorter. In addition, the employee may continue
District insurance coverages including dependent coverage, but at the
employee’s expense, on the same basis as available to current District employees,
for a period of eighteen (18) months after being called to duty, for so long as the
57
===== page 64 =====
employee is in active military service.
EXTENDED LEAVES OF ABSENCE
E-28 RETURN RIGHT-REPLACEMENT: Upon request made at the time of leave application, the
employee shall be returned to his/her/their former assignment provided the total duration
of the leave is one (1) year or less. Such assurance would not be available if circumstances
prohibit it. When an employee requests to return to his/her/their former assignment, the
individual employed to fill a vacancy created by the leave of absence shall be employed
on a temporary basis.
E-29 NOTIFICATION: An employee of the District whose leave of absence expires at the end of
the fall semester shall notify the District of his/her/their intent to return by no later than
st
December 1 . An employee of the District who is on leave during the spring semester
whose leave expires prior to the beginning of the following school year shall notify the
st
District by April 1 of intent to return. Failure to so notify the District will result in
termination unless there are mitigating circumstances which would make such
notification impossible.
E-30 LEAVE OF ABSENCE FOR IMPROVEMENT OF HEALTH: Leaves of absence for
improvement of health of the employee or the employee’s immediate family shall be
granted upon written application accompanied by documentation from a medical doctor
not to exceed one (1) year in length.
E-31 LEAVE FOR GOVERNMENTAL SERVICE: An employee of the District elected or
appointed to serve in a position of community, county, state or national governmental
service will be granted a leave of absence without pay if the governmental service requires
the employee to be absent from his duties in the District.
E-31.1 Daily salary deductions for this purpose shall be based on the actual salary of the
employee divided by the number of scheduled work days for the employee for a
specific year. If the governmental service requires daily part-time absence, salary
deduction shall be prorated.
E-31.2 For the purpose of this policy, full-time campaigning on one’s behalf shall be
construed as governmental service.
E-32 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT: The conditions of this agreement will remain in
compliance with current FMLA regulations.
1. Employees with required medical documentation will be granted up to 12
weeks of unpaid leave for any of the following reasons:
a. To care for the employee’s child after birth, or placement for adoption or
foster care.
b. To care for the employee’s family member who has a serious health
condition.
c. For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform
58
===== page 65 =====
his/her/their job.
2. Employees will use accrued paid leave for the absence up to their available
balances unless the employee provides written notification to Human
Resources prior to the beginning of the leave to use unpaid leave.
3. For the duration of the 12 week leave, the District will maintain all group
health, dental and life insurance benefits.
4. The employee’s 12 week leave will not be considered a break in service and
he/she/they will be reinstated to the same or equivalent job with the same pay,
benefits and terms and conditions of employment on their return from leave in
accordance with current FMLA regulations.
E-33 EXTENDED ABSENCES FOR PERSONAL REASONS: Extended absences without pay
for personal reasons, not to exceed one year in length, will not be granted for an employee
to work out of the district. Provided, however, that employees who will teach in another
country will be granted such leave when the leave conforms to the BVSD school calendar.
An extension of such leave may be granted at the discretion of the Board of Education. In
extenuating circumstances, the district may grant a leave for another purpose. A personal
leave request is subject to the following conditions:
1. APPLICATION: An employee requesting an extended leave of absence for the
second semester or third trimester shall submit such request to the Human
Resources Division, with a copy to the principal, prior to December 1, of the
semester or trimester preceding the leave. An employee requesting an extended
leave of absence for the first semester or first or second trimester of the ensuing
school year shall submit such request to the Human Resources Division, with a
copy to the principal, prior to April 1, of the year preceding the leave. When
unforeseen circumstances result in an employee request for leave after December
st st
1 or April 1 , the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources may waive the
deadline dates.
2. Approval must be recommended by the Superintendent and other
administrative officials concerned.
3. The Board of Education must approve the application.
E-33.1 PARENTAL LEAVE: Extended absences for newborn child care or adoptive child
care, not to exceed one year in length, shall be granted without pay to licensed
employees (including probationary) according to the above conditions.
E-34 LEAVE FOR PROFESSIONAL STUDY: Upon the recommendation of the Superintendent,
the Board of Education will consider application of any full-time employee for a leave of
absence without payment of regular salary for one quarter, one trimester, one semester or
one year for the purpose of professional study. Such employee must have a minimum of
five years of satisfactory and uninterrupted service in the Boulder Valley Schools. In
59
===== page 66 =====
special or unique circumstances, subject to the prior approval of the Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources, an extension of such leave may be granted.
E-34.1 For the purpose of this provision, neither military leave nor sick leave shall be
interpreted as having interrupted service. Previous leave for travel or professional
study or for the improvement of health, leave for exchange teaching, or
miscellaneous personal leaves of extended length constitute interruption of
service.
E-34.2 LEAVE FOR PROFESSIONAL STUDY, APPLICATION: The application for
a leave for professional study shall be filed in the office of the Assistant
Superintendent of Human Resources no later than April 1, or November 1,
preceding the term it is desired that the leave become effective. The application
will be immediately referred to the appropriate District administrator for
consideration and processing. The application should include a description of the
program which the applicant plans to pursue during the absence, as well as a
statement of the employee’s commitment to return to active service with the
Boulder Valley Schools for at least one year. Failure to return for at least one
year from a leave shall obligate the employee to refund any monies received
under section E-39.4 unless mitigating circumstances are accepted by the Board
of Education as reason for waiving this obligation. In determining his/her/their
recommendation to the Board of Education, the Superintendent of Schools will
consider: a) the extent of the applicant’s professional study, growth and
contributions during his/her/their term of service with the Boulder Valley
Schools, b) the extent to which study will contribute to the cultural and technical
qualifications of the employee for his/her/their work in the Boulder Valley
Schools and c) length of uninterrupted service in the Boulder Valley Schools.
E-34.3 Salary increments or reductions and employee rights will accrue to the
employee while he/she/they is on leave for professional study.
E-34.4 LEAVE FOR PROFESSIONAL STUDY, SCHOLARSHIP: An eligible
employee placed upon a leave of absence for professional study may apply to the
Board of Education for a scholarship of $750 for one academic quarter, $1000
for one academic semester or $2000 for a full academic year. Those employees
who receive a scholarship shall execute a scholarship agreement with the Board
of Education which shall include the following terms:
1. As a condition of receiving the scholarship the teacher must satisfactorily
complete all academic work or research projects in his/her/their program of
study.
2. The employee shall provide the Superintendent of Schools with a transcript of
grades upon receipt of the same, and will provide any additional reports or
information as may be reasonably required by the Superintendent.
3. The employee shall agree to return to the District following the leave of absence
and to enter upon and perform the services of an employee or administrator for
a period of at least one year. Should the employee fail to do this, all sums paid
60
===== page 67 =====
shall immediately become due and payable from the employee to the School
District. If the employee is unable to complete the required year of service
because of illness or disability not due to his/her/their own negligence, the
employee will have an additional period of time following recovery from such
illness or disability to complete the year of service required.
4. Scholarship recipients shall be reimbursed at the beginning of each term of
study at the institution at which they are duly enrolled.
E-35 CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION PROFICIENCY LEAVE: Upon the
recommendation of the Superintendent, the Board of Education will consider the
application of any full-time vocationally credentialed employee for leave of absence
without payment of regular salary for one semester or one year for the purpose of
increasing vocational proficiency. For the purpose of this provision, eligible employees
include those credentialed employees teaching in Board-approved programs at Boulder
Technical Education Center or in Consumer and Family Science, Marketing and
Technology and Industry or Business Education programs in the regular high school. Such
employee must have a minimum of 5 years satisfactory and uninterrupted service in
Boulder Valley Schools. For each 1,000 hours of work done under this provision, .02 index
points will be granted on the salary schedule, up to a maximum of .04 index points per
year.
E-36 MILITARY LEAVE FOR ACTIVE SERVICE: Any full-time employee of the District who enlists
in or is inducted into the armed forces will be granted a leave of absence without pay.
He/she/they will retain the status of probation or teacher he/she/they had achieved prior to
his/her/their entry into the service. The District will require written notice from the employee
of his/her/their intention to resume employment six months before the date he/she/they wishes
to reenter the employment of the District.
E-36.1 The provisions of this leave and the accompanying benefits will automatically
expire if the employee does not give the District written notice of his/her/their
intention to resume employment within six months after his/her/their eligibility
for separation from service, or after the termination of the emergency, whichever
is earlier. The District reserves the right to revoke or deny extension of leave to
an employee remaining in military service beyond the compulsory period.
E-37 LEAVE RIGHTS: A member of Unit B on a leave of absence will accrue seniority rights as if
on active service to the District. Except as provided in E-39.2 for Professional Leave,
salary increments will not accrue for an employee on a leave of absence. Subject to the
provisions of insurance policies, an employee on leave of absence without pay may
participate in the District’s medical and dental insurance plans at their own expense
through COBRA.
E-38 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT: During the term of this Agreement, an amount equivalent to
four (4) times the employee base salary (BA = Step A) per school year will be allocated
annually for the use of tuition reimbursement. Any Unit B employee with a regular
contract who has completed one year of satisfactory service and who has been notified of
reemployment for the succeeding year and who is not on leave of absence may apply for
reimbursement of tuition incurred in study for credit at a BVSD approved institution of
higher learning (currently those with Higher Learning Commission accreditation or
61
===== page 68 =====
equivalent – https://www.hlcommission.org) provided such course(s) are shared with the
employee’s supervisor in accordance with D-7 or D-8, directly applicable to his/her/their
teaching subject area or related subject area and/or is directly related to the school district
goals. Coursework that does not meet the above criteria will not be reimbursed. Such
reimbursement will be granted for a maximum of three semester hours (or equivalent) per
college term and ten semester hours (or equivalent) during the summer term unless
approval for more is obtained in advance from the appropriate level director. Tuition
reimbursement shall be made for study at any Colorado state supported institution of
higher education. For study at any other institute of higher education, including third party
off campus, tuition reimbursement shall not exceed the tuition rate for the corresponding
term at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
E-38.1 In order to receive reimbursement, employees must submit the following
documentation:
1. Official transcripts from the college or university conferring credit must be
submitted with the tuition reimbursement request. The date credit for a course
is earned will be determined by the course’s semester end date indicated on the
official transcript. Proper documentation of payment of course(s) from the
college or university.
2. Completion of appropriate form requesting tuition reimbursement.
3. All documentation must be received in the Human Resources Division between
January 1 and February 28 of the calendar year following course completion.
4. Third party off campus credits and/or payment receipts will not be accepted.
E-38.2 The following reimbursement procedures will apply:
1. Any coursework taken during a calendar year must be submitted between
January 1 and February 28 of the following calendar year. Reimbursement will
occur in March.
2. In the event the total of approved requests is within the dollar limitation, all
approved requests will be paid in full.
3. In the event the total of approved requests exceeds the dollar limitation,
payments will be prorated.
4. In the event proration results in amounts of less than $5.00, the sum of such
proration will be carried forward and added to the subsequent calendar year
allocation.
E-38.3 Beginning with the first tuition reimbursement, no employee will be granted more
than $2000 during the next four consecutive years.
E-38.4 Unit B employees on leave of absence shall not be eligible for tuition
reimbursement.
62
===== page 69 =====
E-38.5 Request for special consideration may be submitted by employees for whom
unusual circumstances have been created by the adoption of this policy.
E-39 PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT
Employees shall be provided opportunities to attend curriculum and instruction conferences as
dictated by program development needs.
E-39.1 Responsibility for the administration of the program development conference
request lies with the District administration.
E-39.2 The appropriate District curriculum committee(s), which shall include employees,
will assist in the determination of program needs and in the selection of
participants at such conferences. This committee(s) shall develop, with the
assistance of the administration, the guidelines and procedures to be used in
carrying out its responsibility.
E-40 CHANGE OF PAY STATUS
*The MOU, “Change of Pay Status” on page 103 and the “Compensation: Revised Salary
Schedule 2026” on pages 106-107 supersedes relevant language in this section *
Employees may request to move horizontally on the salary schedule using three options:
● College or University credit
o Must be earned through a BVSD approved institution of higher
learning--https://www.hlcommission.org or equivalent
o Must be applicable to the employee’s teaching or related
educational fields and aligned to the BVSD Educator Effectiveness
Standards
● BVSD Salary Credit
● BVSD Leadership Credit
E-40.1 It shall be the employee’s responsibility to initiate a request of horizontal increases
in salary due to additional hours of training credit. Requests shall be made in the
Human Resources Department on a change of pay status request form which can
be obtained from the Human Resources Department.
Official transcripts must be submitted with the horizontal movement request. The
completion date listed on the official transcript will be used to determine when
the credit was earned.
E-40.2 Credit on the employee salary schedule shall be granted for successful completion
of District programs or courses that have been identified as qualifying for BVSD
salary or leadership credit.
E-40.3 Hours of credit earned after an employee has earned a BA degree, but before an
MA degree is earned, cannot be applied to the MA columns. Only hours earned
in semesters after the MA confer date, as documented on official transcripts, can
63
===== page 70 =====
be used for horizontal movement beyond the MA.
E-40.4 Employees may move one lane on the horizontal salary schedule by accruing
qualifying credits. Employees are limited to applying twelve (12) qualifying credits
for a pay change each BVSD academic year.
a. BVSD Professional Learning Salary and Leadership Credits
shall be earned in the following manner: One (1) credit is equal to 30 hours; 0.5
credit is equal to 15 hours; 0.25 credit is equal to 7.5 hours. Leadership and Salary
credit are approved and tracked through the Professional Learning Department.
b. Leadership or other roles eligible for credit may include: leadership team,
committee chair, professional development leader, service on district committees,
and BVEA leadership.
c. Credit may not be accrued for positions or activities for which the employee
already receives compensation or which take place during contract hours.
d. Employees may move two (2) lanes in one academic year on the horizontal
salary schedule for credits earned as part of a qualifying graduate degree program
or program that results in a qualifying endorsement, certification, or licensure.
e. Beginning Fall 2024 credits earned in excess of twelve (12) credits that are
eligible for horizontal movement in a given academic year, may be accrued for
future applications for horizontal movement. For purposes of horizontal
movement, accrued credits older than 7 years are not eligible for consideration for
horizontal movement.
f. Credits in excess of twelve (12) accrued in a given calendar year prior to Fall of
2024 are not eligible for consideration for horizontal movement.
E-40.5 The effective date for horizontal change requests will be the start of each contract
year. Horizontal movement will take place prior to steps being provided beginning
in August 2022. Employees are eligible to submit one Change of Pay request per
BVSD academic year.
a. For purposes of horizontal movement on the salary schedule, BVSD will
honor transcripts from Summer Semester courses which are submitted prior
to October 15 each year, and the pay increase will be retroactive to August
of that same year. Courses that are listed on transcripts indicating Fall
Semester will not be applied to horizontal movement until the following
academic year. If the university/college transcripts are represented as a
calendar year, the date of course completion as represented on the transcript
will be used; any courses completed after August 31, of each year will be
applied to horizontal movement the following academic year. For dates that
fall on a weekend or a holiday, the next contract day will serve as the
deadline date.
b. Courses that commence and are completed in August may be considered
Fall Semester courses by certain accrediting institutions. Course participants
should verify dates of terms with those institutions.
E-41 VOLUNTARY REDUCTION: Employees may voluntarily reduce to less than a 1.0 FTE
contract by receiving written approval from the employee’s principal/supervisor and giving written
notice to the Human Resources Division by April 1. Such reduction may be approved for up to one
64
===== page 71 =====
(1) year. An extension of such reduction may be granted not to exceed two (2) years in length. If
such reduction continues beyond two (2) years, the employee forfeits his/her/their rights to a 1.0 FTE
contract and remains at the reduced FTE.
E-42 JOB SHARES
1. Job sharing involves two employees (one non-probationary employee and one
limited term job share partner) who voluntarily agree to share one full-time
assignment in the District. Employees wishing to job share must find a partner
in consultation with the building principal or designee and complete the
appropriate forms by May 1 of the previous school year. Upon approval by the
building principal, the job share shall be granted for one semester or one school
year.
2. Non-Probationary employees are eligible to job share. The non-probationary
employee requesting the job share will be returned to their former position at
the end of the job share. Employees wishing to job share beyond one year need
to request a new job share for the following year.
3. Limited term, part-time, temporary and substitute employees, who hold a valid
license are eligible to be a job share partner. Highly qualified requirements, if
applicable, must also be complied with.
4. The minimum FTE for the non-probationary employee shall be .5 FTE. The
minimum FTE for the job share partner shall be .4 FTE
5. 50/50 job share requests shall not be arbitrarily denied, up to a maximum of
fifteen (15) 50/50 job shares in one year. Requests for 50/50 job shares beyond
15 in one year will be denied.
6. The two employees will proportionately share the annual leave days accrued to
their position with their job share partner.
7. Job share partners who participate in a 50/50 job share are each entitled to the
district health insurance coverage. The cost of this insurance coverage will be
taken from the one-time money designated by the district. There will be a
maximum of 15 50/50 job share partners in one year.
E-43 BVSD/BVEA 110 PLAN
The District agrees to continue the 110 program under PERA guidelines for employees
who desire post-retirement employment. Employee’s wishing to participate in this
st
program must turn in the appropriate form(s) no later than April 1 . It is recommended
employees notify PERA of their intention to retire 60 to 90 days before the last work day
of the contract. Modification or continuation of the 110 plan is subject to any applicable
change in PERA rules, regulations or guidelines that require a modification or otherwise
restrict continuation of the 110 plan. Employment under this plan is currently limited to
not more than one hundred ten (110) days in any calendar year and to one school year.
65
===== page 72 =====
The employee’s assignment, salary, and other working conditions will be the same as the
employee would have received had the employee not chosen to participate in the 110 plan,
with the exception that the District will not provide access to the sick leave bank during
the 110 plan. Benefits will be limited to employees working 0.75 FTE or greater, who may
participate in the District’s separate 110 medical insurance plan at the applicable
contribution rates. The employee may participate in the District’s medical and dental
insurance plans at their own expense through COBRA.
Employees on a 110, working .50 FTE or greater will receive five (5) annual leave days
per year, prorated by FTE.
SECTION F: PRIVILEGES & FACILITIES
F-1 ASSOCIATION PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT: The Board of Education agrees,
subject to the conditions below, that the President and the Vice President of the Boulder
Valley Education Association, while they are officially representing the Unit B bargaining
unit during the year, should be released from their duties without loss of salary, seniority,
or benefits as follows:
F-1.1 Association President: A limited term replacement shall be hired and the Association
President shall work with the replacement to the extent that the educational
program in his/her/their classes is not disrupted. The President shall also submit,
upon request of the Superintendent or designee, a report covering activities
relative to the improvement of District instructional programs and/or
contributions toward employee relationships.
F-1.2 The President of BVEA shall work and be compensated for a 210 day contract. F-
1.3 Association Vice President: The Vice President shall be released full-time (1.0
FTE) while officially representing Unit B. A limited term replacement shall be
hired and the Association Vice President shall work with the replacement to the
extent that the educational program in his/her/their classes is not disrupted. The
Vice President shall also submit, upon request of the Superintendent or designee,
a report covering activities relative to the improvement of the District
instructional programs and/or contributions toward employee relationships.
F-1.4 The employee(s) employed to replace the Association president and/or vice president
shall be employed on a temporary basis. The employee(s) serving as Association
president and/or vice president shall have the privilege of returning to
his/her/their former assignment(s) unless circumstances would prohibit it, or if
accepting a different assignment.
F-2 USE OF FACILITIES: The Association shall be granted use of school building facilities for
holding local Association building meetings, Association Representative council meetings,
general membership meetings and committee meetings for conducting official Association
business provided reasonable notice is given to the Superintendent or his designated
representative, and further, provided such meeting does not interfere with or disrupt the
normal operation or use of the facility in question. If a charge shall be made of all other
groups for such use, the Association shall be charged the lowest rate charged any other
group, or for extra janitor’s salary, whichever is lower.
66
===== page 73 =====
F-2.1 The Association shall have the exclusive use of a bulletin board in each faculty
lounge. If the Association building representative and the principal agree that this
bulletin board is inadequate, the principal will provide additional space on the
office bulletin board. The building representative shall be responsible for the
BVEA material appearing on the bulletin board.
F-2.2 The Association shall have the right to purchase supplies and other materials from
the District at the price paid by the District which are normally stocked in the
District Warehouse. Such materials and supplies are to be used solely for
Association purposes.
F-2.3 The Association shall have reasonable access to the District mail and email systems
within the parameters of school district policy.
F-3 BOARD MEETING INFORMATION: The Board agrees to make available to the Association
the complete “information packet” prepared for each Board meeting. The Board “packet”
will be posted on the website at least four (4) calendar days prior to the meeting and
available to BVEA. This shall be posted on the website at the same time as it is viewable
for Board members. If there are last minute additions or addendums to the packet, the
Association shall be informed of such additions and they shall also be available. The
District agrees to provide BVEA copies of all district responses to Requests for
Information as a standing Colorado Open Records Request at the same time they are
provided to the Board members.
F-4 PROFESSIONAL LEAVE FOR ASSOCIATION BUSINESS: The Board shall grant to
the Association 100 days of paid leave for its representatives to attend workshops,
conferences, and other activities of the Association and its state and national affiliates
(BVEA days). Requests shall be processed through the Association. Additional leave days
may be granted to the Association by the Superintendent provided the expense of the
substitute(s) shall be paid by the Association.
F-4.1 The amount of leave is to be allocated to individual employees at the discretion of
the Association, except that if in the judgment of the principal repeated absences
of an individual employee are harmful to the education of the students affected,
the principal may recommend in writing to the BVEA President and the Deputy
Superintendent that these days be limited for that employee.
F-4.2 The Board recognizes that members of Unit B should be encouraged to seek election
or appointment to CEA and NEA office or offices of their affiliates. Leave taken
to serve in such official capacity shall not be charged to the number of leave days
referred to in F-4.1. Requests for such leave must be submitted before seeking
the office and approval received from the building principal and Deputy
Superintendent. If approved, such time released will be with pay provided
compensation is not otherwise provided and shall not exceed ten (10) days per
academic year.
F-5 PAYROLL DEDUCTION: The District agrees to deduct from each employee’s salary an amount
to cover the Association dues and EMO contributions which each employee voluntarily
authorizes to be deducted. The District will transmit the amount so deducted and so
67
===== page 74 =====
authorized to the Treasurer of the Association or designee. The Association will provide
the District with a copy of each form authorizing such deductions.
F-5.1 LUMP SUM OR MONTHLY INSTALLMENTS: Individual employees may elect
to have the annual Association dues deducted in a lump sum or in twelve
(12)equal monthly installments by indicating same on the form provided for that
purpose and transmitting same to the District.
F-5.2 HOLD HARMLESS: The Association agrees to hold the Board and the District
harmless from any suit, action, complaint, or the like, growing out of these
deductions, and assumes full responsibility for the disposition of the funds so
deducted once they have been turned over to the Treasurer of the Association or
designee. The Association agrees that, in the event of any litigation against the
District, its agents or employees, arising out of this provision, it will co-defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the District, its agents or employees, from any
monetary award or any costs arising out of such litigation, including but not
limited to attorney’s fees and costs.
F-5.3 ASSOCIATION NOTIFICATION: The Association shall notify the District Payroll
Office in writing, of the current rate of membership dues to be applied with
respect to any dues deductions set forth in this Article. Any such notification
th
must be submitted by the 10 day of the month that the new rates are effective,
or such other dates as mutually agreed upon.
F-6 VISITING SCHOOLS: Association members and others acting on their behalf shall be permitted
to visit schools for carrying out Association business as needed. Such visitations shall not
interfere with the educational program or administrative affairs of the school visited. All
visitors shall comply with District security requirements and the Colorado Revised Statutes
covering public buildings.
F-7 BUILDING MEETINGS: The Association Representative(s) for each school shall have the right
to schedule Association meetings before or after school or during lunch periods. The
representative shall obtain a building calendar from his/her/their principal or designated
representative. The meetings shall not conflict with the building calendar or the duty
schedules of the employees in the building.
F-8 DISTRICT INFORMATION: The Board agrees to make available to the Association in
response to requests, information including but not limited to: annual financial reports and
audits, register of employees, tentative budgetary requirements and allocations,
agenda and minutes of all Board meetings, pupil enrollment figures, names and addresses
of all employees, and an annual actual class size report.
F-9 EMPLOYEE FILES: Each member of Unit B shall have the right to review the contents of
his/her/their personnel file, whether in the central office or the school building, excepting
however, any confidential references given at the time of employment. At the employee’s
written request, a representative of BVEA may accompany the employee in such review.
F-9.1 No material or complaint of a derogatory nature will be placed in the file unless
68
===== page 75 =====
such material or complaint shall be signed by the person(s) making such
derogatory allegations or by the appropriate administrator. Anonymous
complaints will not become a part of an employee’s personnel file orrecord.
F-9.2 Such records of complaints and any statements relating to an employee’s conduct,
service, character or personality shall not be placed in either an employee’s
building personnel file or the District Personnel File without so informing the
employee and giving him/her an opportunity to attach a reply or comments to the
complaint or statement(s).
F-10 EMPLOYEES’ FACILITIES
Each school will have the following facilities:
a. Storage space and work space for each employee. The Board shall not be
held to be the insurer of the employee’s personal belongings stored in such
place.
b. Well-lighted, well-ventilated, clean employee restrooms.
c. There shall be a furnished lounge and an equipment workroom provided for
employees in each school. Plans to provide such space where it is needed
shall be initiated. Whenever physical facilities permit, as determined by the
school planner, and unless the faculty by majority vote opposes necessary
alterations, faculty workrooms and lounges shall be separate.
d. The District shall supply an electronic copy of an employee directory to
BVEA by September 30. Such directory shall contain the phone numbers
and addresses of all District schools; a list of all District employees by
school ordered by alphabet with assignment; and an alphabetical listing of
all District personnel with assignment, and telephone number (where not
restricted).
e. The District shall supply all members of Unit B with an electronic copy of
the Negotiated Agreement no later than 20 teaching days after final
ratification. The District will provide BVEA an electronic copy of the full
Agreement in a District available format(s) as requested by BVEA, and 100
printed copies of this Negotiated Agreement within thirty (30) teaching
days after such final ratification. Extra copies desired by the Association
shall be provided at the Association’s expense.
f. The District shall provide an activity ticket free of charge to each employee
for admission of two (2) persons to events that occur in the cluster schools
in which he/she/they teach. The employee may purchase an additional
activity ticket for admission of two (2) persons to non-cluster events, at a
cost of eight dollars ($8.00) per ticket.
g. Every reasonable effort will be made to provide parking space for each
employee.
h. A telephone for employee use for school business and/or necessary private
business shall be provided in all buildings. Such telephones are not to be
used for long distance calls unless arrangements are made through the building
principal. It is recognized that physical limitations of existing buildings may limit
the privacy of such facilities.
F-11 SALARY LETTER: The District shall supply the information below to Unit B employees no
69
===== page 76 =====
st
later than December 1 of each year. If a computer malfunction occurs, this date may be
waived, but such letter shall be issued to employees prior to the close of the school year.
New salary
Total years in the District
Degrees and hours for which compensated Date license has to be renewed
Type of license held
F-11.1 Accumulated annual leave will be reported in the employee portal.
F-12 LEAVE ACCOUNTING: When regular reports are developed on absences requiring
substitute employees, they shall be made available to the Association. Such reports shall
include:
Annual leave
Professional leave (BVEA days) District in-service
Administration-initiated meetings
F-13 CHILDREN OF EMPLOYEES: Children of employees will have a preference to attend the
school in which the employee works, in accordance with District open enrollment policies
and procedures.
SECTION G: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
G-1 DEFINITIONS: A “grievance” shall mean a complaint by a member or group of members
of Unit B that there has been a violation, a misrepresentation, or inequitable application of
any of the provisions of this Agreement, or of any policy concerning terms and conditions
of employment. The term “grievance” and the procedure relative thereto shall not be
deemed applicable in the case of the failure or refusal of the Board to renew the contract
of a probationary employee or in case of dismissal procedures or other matters governed
solely by the Teacher Employment, Compensation and Dismissal Act of 1990 as it now
exists or may hereafter be amended.
G-1.1 The written grievance shall refer specifically to the provision(s) of this Agreement
or policy as referenced to in G-1, which it is alleged has been violated,
misinterpreted, or unreasonably or inequitably applied and shall specify the
remedial action requested. A grievance which does not contain this information
may be summarily denied.
G-1.2 A “grievant” is the employee or employees in Unit B making the claim.
G-1.3 A “party in interest” is an employee who might be required to take action or against
whom action might be taken in order to resolve a grievance.
G-1.4 “Day” or “days” where used in this Grievance Procedure shall mean, unless
otherwise indicated, working days for members of Unit B.
70
===== page 77 =====
G-1.5 “LEVEL” as used in this Grievance Procedure shall mean the separate and distinct
stages to be followed in sequential order in the processing of grievances.
G-1.6 “Association” where used in this Grievance Procedure shall mean the recognized
negotiation organization for Unit B.
G-2 PURPOSE: The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible
administrative level, equitable solution to the problems which may, from time to time,
arise. Both parties to this Agreement agree that these proceedings will be kept as informal
and confidential as may be appropriate at any level of the procedure.
G-3 PROCEDURE: Grievances should be processed as rapidly as possible. The number of days
indicated at each level shall be considered as a maximum, and a good faith effort shall be
made to expedite the process. The time limits may be extended by mutual agreement. No
grievance shall be recognized by the Association or the Board of Education unless it shall
have been filed in writing or discussed in a joint meeting at LEVEL ONE within fifteen
(15) days after the aggrieved knew, or should have known, of the act or condition on which
the grievance is based, and if not so presented, the grievance will be considered waived. If
a grievance is filed which might not be finally resolved at LEVEL FOUR under the time
limits set forth herein prior to the end of the school year, the time limits set forth herein
will be reduced so that the grievance procedure will be concluded prior to the end of the
school year, or as soon thereafter as is practicable.
G-3.1 If, in the judgment of the Association, a grievance affects a group of Unit B members
and two or more principals or no principal, the Association may submit such a
grievance in writing to the appropriate level executive director or assistant
superintendent and the processing of the grievance shall begin at LEVEL TWO.
G-3.2 No grievance may be filed regarding any matter for which the method of review is
prescribed by law or in which the Board of Education is without authority to act.
G-3.3 Neither the Board of Education nor any member of administration will take reprisals
of any nature against any grievant, party in interest, Association representative,
or any other participant in the Grievance Procedure because of participation in
the Grievance procedure.
G-3.4 During the processing of the grievance through the various levels of the procedure,
timely filing must be made, or the grievance will be considered waived.
G-3.5 If a member of Unit B elects to pursue any legal or statutory remedy for a grievance,
such election will bar any further or subsequent proceedings for relief in said
grievance under the provisions of this Grievance Procedure.
G-3.6 All written or printed matter dealing with any grievance will be filed separately
from any other records maintained by the District and will not become a part of
the personnel file of any grievant.
G-3.7 The Board of Education will make available to any aggrieved person and/or
representative(s) all pertinent information not privileged under law in its
71
===== page 78 =====
possession and control and which is relevant to the issues raised by the grievance.
G-3.8 The rights and professional reputation of all parties in interest are to be protected
by all means possible, and the interruption of classroom activities and the
involvement of students are to be avoided wherever possible in all phases of the
Grievance Procedure.
G-3.9 The filing or pendency of any grievance shall in no way operate to interfere with
the right of the Board of Education and/or the administration to continue the
contested action.
G-3.10 When it is necessary for employees of the District to attend a meeting or hearing
called to resolve a grievance, such employees shall be provided released time
without loss of pay for such time as their attendance is required at such meeting
or hearing subject to the following limitations:
Level One The grievant, and if requested, one Association representative
and/or not more than one other employee.
Level Two The grievant, and Association representative and not more than
two other employees.
Level Three The grievant, the Association representative and not more than two
other employees.
Level Four The grievant, the Association representative and such number(s)
of other witnesses as may be mutually agreed upon by both
parties.
Notification to such employees’ immediate supervisor will be made by the
appropriate level administration. Necessary arrangements will be made to avoid
interruption of the regular school duties of such employee(s).
G-4 INFORMAL CONFERENCE: Prior to the filing of a grievance at LEVEL ONE, the
employee shall discuss the matter with his/her/their immediate supervisor in an effort to
resolve the issue(s) informally. The aggrieved employee (1) may request that the
Association’s representative or some other person be in attendance, or (2) may request that
the Association’s representative or some other person act in the employee’s behalf. If the
informal conference cannot be held before the deadline for filing at LEVEL ONE, the
deadline shall be extended to a mutually agreed upon date.
G-5 LEVEL ONE: If not resolved informally, the grievant may file the grievance in writing
with the immediate supervisor. The written grievance will state the nature of the grievance,
the provision(s) of the agreement or any policy concerning terms and
conditions of employment allegedly violated, and the relief requested. The immediate
supervisor will provide a written answer to the reason(s) therefore to the grievance within
five (5) days and will provide a copy of that decision to the Association, the grievant, the
72
===== page 79 =====
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, and the appropriate District administrator.
G-6 LEVEL TWO: If the grievance has not been resolved at LEVEL ONE, it may be appealed
in writing by the Association to the appropriate level Executive Director or Assistant
Superintendent within five (5) days after receipt of the written decision from LEVEL ONE.
G-6.1 The Executive Director or Assistant Superintendent and/or representative(s) will
meet with the aggrieved employee and/or representative(s) with five (5) days of
the receipt of the written grievance from the Association in an effort to resolve the
grievance using the Interest-Based Problem-Solving Model.
G-6.2 If Interest-Based Problem-Solving is not successful within five (5) days after
hearing the grievance, the Executive Director or Assistant Superintendent will
render a written decision including the reason(s) therefore and either present it or
send it by U.S. mail to the Grievant and to all parties in interest officially present
at the hearing, as well as to the President of the Association.
G-7 LEVEL THREE: If the grievance has not been resolved at LEVEL TWO, or if no decision
has been rendered in writing within five (5) days after the hearing, and the Association
deems to do so, the grievance may be appealed to the Superintendent within five (5) days
after receipt of the written decision or the five (5) day period in which no decision was
rendered.
G-7.1 The Superintendent and/or representative(s) will meet with the grievant and/or
representative(s) within ten (10) days after receipt of the written grievance in an
effort to resolve the grievance.
G-7.2 Within ten (10) days after hearing the grievance, the Superintendent or his/her/their
representative will render a written decision including the reason(s) therefore and
either present it or send it by U.S. mail to the Grievant and to all parties in interest
officially present at the hearing, as well as to the President of the Association.
G-8 LEVEL FOUR: If the grievance has not been resolved at LEVEL THREE, or if no decision
has been rendered in writing within ten (10) days after the Superintendent or his/her/their
representative heard the grievance, and the Association deems to do so, the Association
may demand arbitration. Such demand must be made within ten (10) days after receipt of
the Superintendent’s or his/her/their representative’s response or the ten
(10) day period of no response. Within ten (10) days of the demand for arbitration, the
Board and/or representative(s) and the Association and/or representative(s) will select an
arbitrator. In the event the parties are unable to agree on an arbitrator, selection shall be
made in the manner provided by the current Negotiations Procedure for selecting a
mediator.
G-8.1 The arbitrator will have the authority to hold hearings and make procedural rules.
All hearings held by the arbitrator shall be in closed sessions and no news release
shall be made concerning progress of the hearings.
G-8.2 The arbitrator will submit a written report not more than fifteen (15) days after the
last hearing date or if hearings have been waived, not more than fifteen (15) days
73
===== page 80 =====
after receipt of briefs filed in the case. Copies of the report will be sent to the
Association, the Board of Education and the Grievant and will set forth findings
of fact, reasoning, conclusions and recommendations on the issue(s) submitted.
The arbitrator shall not amend, take away, add to, or change any of the provisions
of this Agreement and may consider the only issue(s) submitted in writing by the
Board and Association. The arbitrator’s decision(s) shall be based solely on the
interpretation of the terms of this Agreement and shall be advisory only and
binding neither the Association nor the Board of Education.
G-8.3 Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the arbitrator’s report, a meeting between
Association and Board representatives will be held to discuss the report. No
public release may be made until after such meeting. Each party will advise the
other of its position on the arbitrator’s decision and the reasons therefore.
G-8.4 The Board shall take official action on the report of the arbitrator not later than
thirty (30) days after receipt of the arbitrator’s recommendations.
G-8.5 The costs for the services of the arbitrator, including per diem expenses, necessary
travel and subsistence expenses, shall be shared equally by the Board and the
Association.
G-8.6 Either party may request that an official stenographic record of the testimony at the
hearings be made. The party requesting such record shall pay the costs thereof
except that if the other party shall request a copy of any transcript, it shall share
the entire cost of making the stenographic record.
SECTION H: ADVISORY COUNCIL
H-1 TEACHERS’ ADVISORY COUNCIL(TAC): The Teacher’s Advisory Council shall
continue for the purpose of improving communications and providing an opportunity for
the discussion of items of concern to employees and to the administration.
H-1.1 The function of the Council is advisory. As a result of agenda items discussed, the
Council shall make recommendations to the Superintendent of Schools, Deputy
Superintendent or appropriate Executive Director for their consideration.
H-1.2 TAC membership will include the Superintendent and his/her/their designees and
11 BVEA members that reflect the BVSD organizational model of area networks
as follows:
● One member from each level--elementary, middle and high school for
each of the 3 Area Networks (9 members)
● One member from our PK-8 schools
● If at least two members listed above are not specialists, one additional
specialist member can be added.
● BVEA Vice President
H-1.3 There will be an application process for interested parties. Applications will be
74
===== page 81 =====
reviewed and chosen by the Executive Board for appointment by the President.
If there is no applicant for one of the vacancies, recommendations will come to
the Executive Board and the President will appoint. Appointments will be for 3
years, with no term limits and will replace 1/3 of the members each year to
maintain historical knowledge on the Committee. The Northwest Area Network
will apply for the 2021-2022 school year followed by the East Area Network in
the 2022-2023 school year and the Southwest Area Network in the 2023-2024
school year.
H-1.4 The Chairperson of the Teachers’ Advisory Council shall be elected by the Council
from the employee membership. The operating rules shall be established by the
Council.
H-1.5 Meetings shall be held once monthly September through May according to the
schedule set by the current members of the Council and the Superintendent.
Meeting dates may be changed or additional meetings scheduled when necessity
requires, by mutual agreement.
H-1.6 Items for the agenda are to be written and mailed to the Council chairperson and
the Superintendent for inclusion on the agenda. Minutes will be kept and
distributed appropriately. The Council shall consider only those items that have
not been or cannot be resolved through proper administrative channels. Items
shall not be included on the agenda if they are in the process of negotiations or
in any step of the grievance procedure. The fact that any item is on the agenda or
has been considered by the Council does not mean that it cannot also be proposed
for the negotiations package by either the Board or the negotiating unit. Items
may be added to the agenda at any meeting by majority vote of the Council.
H-1.7 The administration shall respond to the Council on the status of any recommendation
made by the Council within twenty (20) days or at the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting, whichever is first.
H-1.8 Agenda items may be submitted by an employee or group of employees providing
the item or items meet the qualifications for the agenda as established above.
H-1.9 Inquiries concerning duplication of record lists or the gathering of data where
administrative guidance might be needed should be submitted to the appropriate
department head in writing, with a copy to the Superintendent. The department
head shall within five (5) days respond to the inquiry in writing, either supplying
the information or indicating what would be involved in obtaining the
information and suggesting a time and procedure.
H-2 SPECIAL EDUCATION ADVISORY COUNCIL (SPAC): The Special Education
Advisory Council shall continue for the purpose of improving communications and
providing an opportunity for the discussion of items of concern to employees and to the
administration.
H-2.1 The function of the Council is advisory. The Council shall make recommendations to
75
===== page 82 =====
the Executive Director of Special Education for their consideration.
H-2.2 SPAC membership will include members of BVEA that represent the following
positions
● Board Certified Behavior Analyst
● Elementary resource
● Middle school resource
● High school resource
● Elementary resource - Bilingual
● ICAN
● ILC
● Occupational Therapist/ Physical Therapist
● Preschool/ Early Childhood Special Education
● Psychologist
● Social Worker
● Speech Language Pathologist
● Transitions
● BVEA President
H-2.3 There will be an application process for interested parties. Applications will be
reviewed and chosen by the Executive Board for appointment by the President. If there
is no applicant for one of the vacancies, recommendations will come to the Executive
Board and the President will appoint. Appointments will be for 3 years, with no term
limits and will replace 1/3 of the members each year to maintain historical knowledge on
the Committee.
H-2.4 The Chairperson/s of the Special Education Advisory Council shall be elected by
the Council members. The operating rules shall be established by the Council.
H-2.5 Meetings shall be held once monthly September through May according to the
schedule set by the current members of the Council and the Executive Director of Special
Education. Meeting dates may be changed or additional meetings scheduled when
necessity requires, by mutual agreement.
H-2.6 The administration shall respond to the Council on the status of any
recommendation made by the Council within twenty (20) days or at the next
regularly scheduled Council meeting, whichever is first.
H-3 COUNSELOR DISTRICT ADVISORY COUNCIL (CDAC) The Counselor District
Advisory Council shall continue for the purpose of improving communications and
providing an opportunity for the discussion of items of concern to employees and to the
administration.
H-3.1 The function of the Council is advisory. As a result of agenda items discussed, the
Council shall make recommendations to the Deputy Superintendent and his/her/their
76
===== page 83 =====
designees.
H-3.2 CDAC membership will include the Deputy Superintendent and his/her/their
designees and 11 BVEA members that reflect the BVSD organizational model of area
networks as follows:
• One member from each level--elementary, middle and high school for
each of the 3 Area Networks (9 members)
• One member from our PK-8 schools
• BVEA President
H-3.3 There will be an application process for interested parties. Applications will be
reviewed and chosen by the Executive Board for appointment by the President. If there
is no applicant for one of the vacancies, recommendations will come to the Executive
Board and the President will appoint.
Appointments will be for 3 years, with no term limits and will replace 1/3 of the
members each year to maintain historical knowledge on the Committee.
H-3.4 The Chairperson/s of the CDAC shall be elected by the Council members. The
operating rules shall be established by the Council.
H-3.5 Meetings shall be held once monthly September through May according to the
schedule set by the current members of the Council and the Deputy Superintendent and
his/her/their designees.
Meeting dates may be changed or additional meetings scheduled when
necessity requires, by mutual agreement.
H-3.6 The administration shall respond to the Council on the status of any
recommendation made by the Council within twenty (20) days or at the next
regularly scheduled Council meeting, whichever is first.
H-4 DUAL LANGUAGE ADVISORY COUNCIL (DLAC) The Dual Language Advisory Council
shall continue for the purpose of improving communications and providing an opportunity for the
discussion of items of concern to employees and to the administration.
● H-4.1 The function of the Council is advisory. As a result of agenda items discussed, the Council
shall make recommendations to the Deputy Superintendent and his/her/their designees.
● H-4.2 DLAC membership will include the Deputy Superintendent and his/her/their designees
and 9 BVEA members that reflect the BVSD organizational model of area networks as follows:
○ 1 representative from each of the dual language elementary schools who is currently
teaching in a dual language program position
○ 1 special education teacher from each of the dual language elementary schools who is
currently providing services in a dual language program
○ 1 member from each of the dual language middle schools who is currently teaching in a
dual language program position
○ BVEA President or his/her/their designee
○ A principal from a dual language school
77
===== page 84 =====
● H-4.3 There will be an application process for interested parties. Applications will be reviewed
and chosen by the Executive Board for appointment by the President. If there is no applicant for
one of the vacancies, recommendations will come to the Executive Board and the President will
appoint. Appointments will be for 3 years, with no term limits. One-third of the members will be
elected each year to maintain historical knowledge on the Committee.
● H-4.4 The Chairperson/s of the DLAC shall be elected by the Council members. The operating
rules shall be established by the Council.
● H-4.5 Meetings shall be held three times per academic calendar year according to the schedule
set by the current members of the Council and the Deputy Superintendent and/or his/her/their
designee. Meeting dates may be changed or additional meetings scheduled when the necessity
requires, by mutual agreement.
● H-4.6 The administration shall respond to the Council on the status of any recommendation
made by the Council within twenty (20) days or at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting,
whichever is first.
H-5 Hours worked outside the contract day on TAC, SPAC, CDAC, or DLAC may be
compensated through curriculum rate (see Sec E-6) or leadership credits (see Sec
E-40.2 et seq).
SECTION I: PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
I-1 FACULTY ADVISORY COMMITTEE: The purpose of an FAC is to facilitate
collaboration between the faculty and the administration on an on-going basis to address
issues as they arise and to engage in a mutual problem-solving process to resolve issues.
If a building faculty establishes a Faculty Advisory Committee, the principal shall attend
meetings when requested by the committee (given adequate notice) and respond to
questions and recommendations posed by the committee. There will be a fall meeting of
building principals and ARs in 2008 to share information on how to establish and maintain
an effective FAC. Future meetings may be requested by BVEA or BVSD to continue to
facilitate the implementation of an FAC in a building. Each individual building may
request support from BVEA and HR at any time to provide guidance to establish an
effective FAC.
I-2 BUILDING AND REMODELING PLAN: Employees affected by new facilities shall be
represented on advisory planning committees. Employees may recommend to the
appropriate executive director a committee of representatives from among their number to
serve on these committees. The Deputy Superintendent will select at least two thirds of the
members for each such committee from the list submitted. The employees serving on such
committees shall be given released time as determined by the Deputy Superintendent to
perform duties related to the committee’s work. Final plans and specifications shall be
available to the committee for review and recommendations. Before final approval by the
Board of Education, the Deputy Superintendent shall meet with the committees to consider
their questions and recommendations concerning the final plans and shall inform the Board
of them. It is understood that recommendations from such committees are advisory only.
I-3 SCHOOL VISITATION: Principals and counselors shall confer with other employees
78
===== page 85 =====
before scheduling parent conferences, except in cases of emergency.
I-3.1 An employee at his/her/their discretion may bar a visitor from his/her/their classroom
until a conference is held with the principal. This provision is not intended to
discourage parents of children in a classroom from visiting the classroom.
I-4 OTHER MATTERS: Employee concerns not covered in section G-1 should be discussed
with the principal or appropriate supervisor and then may be filed with the Association,
and the Association shall have the right to meet with the appropriate principal or supervisor
in an effort to resolve the issue.
I-5 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT: In a timely manner and through the shared decision
process, staff will be provided the opportunity to give meaningful input into the planning
and implementation of building professional development activities. Participants will have
the opportunity to evaluate professional development activities. The feedback collected
will be shared with the staff. Each building will have a transparent process for the
identification and distribution of building professional development funds.
I-6 PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIPS: BVSD and BVEA commit to a shared value of
collaborating and positive problem solving when schools have significant achievement
challenges. When a school has been identified with significant achievement challenges by
the Superintendent or designee, the district and the stakeholders, including the Association,
will work in a proactive manner to address and communicate the issues. A variety of
assessments and body of evidence will be used to determine the root cause of the
achievement challenges and progress will be monitored through accountability checks by
the Superintendent or designee as the plan is implemented. The achievement challenges
will be identified and discussed with stakeholders including what can happen if
achievement does not improve. If decisions are made to reorganize the school, then C-22
would apply and teacher evaluations will be honored if reassignment or school
transformational decisions are deemed appropriate. A process and timeline will be created
including meaningful input of staff to address the issues and the improvement plan.
Collaboratively, stakeholders will identify the challenges, standards, expectations,
resources, and appropriate central administration support. Training and support for a
collaborative process will be provided as needed.
I-6.1 DISTRICT AND OTHER EQUIPMENT AND TECHNOLOGY
When equipment (e.g. laptops, tablets, projectors or similar technologies) is
assigned to any classroom, the teacher is expected to act prudently in the use and
safekeeping of such items. The District agrees to not hold the teacher financially
responsible for loss or damage to that equipment when the employee’s actions
have been prudent and consistent with policy and procedure. The District agrees
to provide District approved peripherals as needed for the safe operation of such
equipment.
SECTION J: FUTURE CONFERENCE AND TERM
79
===== page 86 =====
J-1 This Agreement shall be in full force and effect from its execution on August 1, 2026 until
and including July 31, 2029. This Agreement shall automatically continue in full force and
effect annually from year to year unless either of the parties hereto shall terminate the same
in accordance with the procedures outlined in J-2.
J-1.1 If either party shall desire to change any of the provisions of this Agreement, it shall
give written notice as outlined in B-3.
J-1.2 If the parties have not reached an agreement on or before the end of the Contract or
reopening term, all provisions of this Agreement shall remain in effect unless
specifically terminated in accordance with the following procedure.
J-2 TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT: Ten (10) or less working days prior to the
termination date of this Agreement on the first anniversary date or at any time thereafter,
if no Agreement on the questions at issue has been reached, either party may give written
notice to the other party terminating the Agreement not less than ten (10) days after receipt
of notification by registered mail. Such notice shall state the date and hour of such
termination. All provisions of the Agreement shall remain in full force and effect until the
specified time has elapsed. During this period, attempts to reach an Agreement shall be
continued.
J-2.1 If the parties have failed to resolve their differences by the specified date, all
obligations under this Agreement are automatically cancelled.
ACCEPTED AND APPROVED ACCEPTED AND APPROVED
Boulder Valley Education Association
Representing the employees of Boulder Board of Education of
the Valley School District RE2 Boulder Valley Schools
by: signature on file by: signature on file
President President
Boulder Valley Education Association Board of Education Boulder Valley
School District RE2
Date: June 9, 2026 Date: June 9, 2026
80
===== page 87 =====
This page is intentionally left blank
81
===== page 88 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
SHARED DECISION MAKING
The Board of Education and the Boulder Valley Education Association agree that giving teachers
increased responsibility for participating in the decision-making process and the collegial
exchange of ideas can result in a more effective professional practice and enhance the learning
environment.
In support of shared decision making, each school will develop procedures that legitimately
engage administrators, teachers, support staff, parents, and students, where appropriate, in the
following areas: proposing, analyzing data, planning, making and implementing decisions, and
evaluating solutions in the best interest of the individual school. This procedure is an evolutionary
process assuming greater definition through review and modification. These procedures shall give
teachers the opportunity to participate in decisions that affect them.
Each school is encouraged to develop a decision-making process that identifies, but is not limited
to the following:
1. How decisions will be made in that school or department;
2. A definition of roles and responsibilities for teachers, administrators, patrons,
non- teaching staff and students;
3. Provision for evaluating the decision-making process to insure that
constituents are appropriately involved at each stage of the process;
4. A means for resolving differences resulting from active involvement.
If, in the evolution of a process for shared decision making at a particular building, staff members
believe that implementation is not proceeding appropriately, their concerns should be discussed
with the building principal to achieve “greater definition through review and modification.” If this
step, “a means for resolving differences,” does not produce a satisfactory resolution, BVEA may
request a meeting with the Superintendent to discuss the concerns. The Superintendent or Deputy
Superintendent will then, if necessary, meet with administrative staff and/or faculty to facilitate.
The Board of Education and the Boulder Valley Education Association further agree to form a
committee composed of three members appointed by the Superintendent and three members
appointed by the Association President. This committee may be convened upon the request of
either the Superintendent or the Association President.
If a decision is made that this is in violation of state law or regulation, Board policy or action, or
the collective bargaining agreement, it shall be the duty of the committee to provide assistance to
the school or program department in an effort to find a manner of implementing the intention(s)
of the school or program department in such fashion so as to avoid the violation. If however, these
efforts are unsuccessful, the Central Administration shall refuse to allow the implementation of
the decision on the basis that to have acted otherwise would have resulted in a violation as
described. This is the sole basis upon which the Central Administration may act to prohibit the
implementation of a decision. If a dispute exists concerning whether a violation would have
82
===== page 89 =====
resulted from the implementation of a decision, said dispute shall be subject to the grievance
procedure of the contract.
The parties agree that this document is an expression of intent to foster the concept of shared
decision-making in Boulder Valley Schools. It is intended to provide a framework in which
schools may actively engage in the exploration of creative and innovative approaches to local
school governance.
Signature on file Signature on file
Steve Armitage Joseph L. Winslow
President, Boulder Valley Education President, Board of Education
Association Boulder Valley Public Schools
October 9, 1995 October 12, 1995
Date Date
*corrected version of Memorandum of Agreement signed and dated February 23, 1995
83
===== page 90 =====
MEMORANDUM
OF UNDERSTANDING
Between
Boulder Valley School District (BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association (BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets for the terms and understanding between the
Boulder Valley School District and the Boulder Valley Education Association for the
BVEA/BVSD Tentative Agreement Summary regarding Extra Pay for Extra Duty MOU
dated April 23, 2018.
Background
The tentative agreement stipulated that the work of the committee was to be completed by May
2019. Due to changes in district administration and conflicts with the strategic plan work, the
committee was unable to meet this deadline. The committee will continue the work during the
2019-2020 school year.
Purpose
This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials and will remain in
effect until modified or terminated during the 2019-2020 school year.
Authorized Officials
signature on file signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 9/16/2019 Date: 9/16/2019
84
===== page 91 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
EXTRA PAY FOR EXTRA DUTY
rd
This agreement of memorandum of understanding (MOU) entered into on April 23 , 2018, is
between the Boulder Valley School District Board of Education (BOE), Boulder Valley School
District administration (BVSD administration) and the Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA).
Purpose
The purpose of this MOU is to establish parameters for a task force charged with reviewing, revising,
and creating recommendations about the Extra Pay for Extra Duty section of the negotiated
agreement. Task force considerations will include but are not limited to the following:
● How should gender equity in coaching pay be addressed?
● Should the extra-duty pay schedule be included in the negotiated agreement?
● Which activities should be listed, and how can that list be fluid enough to accommodate
new activities?
● How can we support equitable student access to athletics and activities when these
offerings differ among schools?
● How are decisions made about how extra-duty contracts are awarded?
● How should we address the pay-vs-work discrepancy between MS and HS coaching?
● Should preference be given to teachers who want BVSD coaching jobs before non-
BVSD employees are considered?
● How are elementary music teachers (and other activities sponsors) compensated for
performances and activities?
● Should base pay for extra-duty contracts increase each year in a systematic way?
● How should the pay amounts for various athletics/activities be amended to better reflect
current offerings and to align work expectations with compensation?
● How should extra-curricular and co-curricular activities be considered differently?
Task Force Membership
The working group shall be composed of fifteen (15) members initially, but may be expanded as
needed. The initial working group will be composed of the following members:
BVEA Members
1 Elementary music teacher
3 Middle school athletic coaches
1 Middle school non-athletic activity sponsor
3 High school athletic coaches
1 High school non-athletic activity sponsor
85
===== page 92 =====
BVSD Administration
Director of Athletics and Activities
1 Elementary building administrator
2 Middle school building
administrators 2 High school building
administrators
BVSD administration and BVEA will identify representative members of the group by
September 1, 2018.
The task force will designate co-chairs who will be responsible for scheduling meetings,
developing agendas, and sub-group management, as well as teacher and administrator
participation.
Timeline
September 1, 2018: Representative members of working group identified and work begins
January 2019: Interim task force progress report presented to the Labor/Management team March
2019: Final task force recommendation presented to Labor/Management team, negotiations
teams, and BOE
May 2019: Final recommendation presented for contract ratification by BVEA membership and
approval by BOE
Funding
BVSD Administration will develop a budget to support the efforts of the task force, including
funding for substitute teachers and facilitation if required.
Authorized Officials
signature on file signature on file
Cynthia Stevenson Tina Mueh
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/23/2018 Date: 4/23/2018
86
===== page 93 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
MIDDLE LEVEL PLANNING
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets for the terms and understanding between the
BVSD and BVEA to increase planning time for teachers at the Middle School level.
Background
BVSD and BVEA mutually recognize that political decisions and election outcomes 25 years
ago have led to major inequities, specifically in terms of planning time, for middle school
teachers in District schools. Our two groups further recognize that sufficient teacher-directed
planning time is essential to the provision of high quality instruction for all students as outlined
by the District's Strategic Plan. Finally, both groups recognize their historic commitment to site-
based shared decision-making.
Purpose
This MOU will set conditions for planned disbursement to District middle schools of $1,150,000,
with said monies to be utilized exclusively for implementing locally-devised solutions to increase
teacher plan time. Monies will be allocated on a per-pupil basis.
In support of this initiative:
Between August and October 31st, 2021, Middle Schools will use a consensus-style shared
decision-making model to develop plans for how to use their site's allocated funds to increase
teacher plan time. All schools will use a consistent process with outside facilitators who are
trained in and will use the "Chadwick Method" to reach group consensus. Building shared
decision-making groups will continue to meet in the Spring semesters of 2022, 2023 and 2024
to monitor and make adjustments to implementations as needed.
Schools will be encouraged to develop means of increasing teacher planning time in ways that
work best for their respective sites. Avenues to be considered might include changes to daily
instructional schedules; the hiring of a licensed teacher; hiring Education Support Professionals
to supervise Study Halls; hiring Building Substitute Teachers; and other means as might be
devised by the building-level shared decision-making groups.
Create and implement a district-wide committee by September 21, 2021 charged with developing
recommendations regarding the need for increased planning time for middle level teachers. Prior
to March 1st of 2022, 2023 and 2024 this committee will monitor and make recommendations
for considerations aligned with the budgeting process. The task force shall consider, but will not
be limited to:
87
===== page 94 =====
● What are the unique needs of middle school students and how can increased planning
time enhance the education experience for these students?
● What practices are currently in place to increase middle school teacher planning time
both as a result of the increase in funding and prior to the increase?
● What resources do we currently provide and which additional resources could be
brought to bear?
● Study of the question of how current district practice aligns with the middle school
essentials and whether our current district leadership and community values call for
further alignment.
The working group shall be composed of twelve (12) members but may be expanded as
needed. The group shall be composed of the following members
6 middle level educators (including from one PK-8 middle school)
2 middle level principals
1 PK-8 principal
1 superintendent or designee
1 association president or vice president
1 member of the BVEA negotiations team
Funding
BVSD will disburse $1,150,000 in August of 2021. For 2022 and 2023 every effort shall be
made to increase this amount as yearly budgets are developed.
Duration
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD
and BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from
BVSD and BVEA, and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the
partners by mutual consent. In the absence of mutual agreement by the authorized officials from
BVSD and BVEA, this MOU shall end on May 31, 2024.
Authorized Officials
signature on file signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 5/19/2021 Date: 5/19/2021
88
===== page 95 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BRIDGING THE GAP OF MTSS TO SPECIAL EDUCATION
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
PURPOSE
We believe that there needs to be a bridge between the resources in Special Education and the
implementation of an effective Multi-Tiered Systems of Support. Current FTE assignments for
school psychologists and social workers have not been aligned with our bargained agreement
which states 1:50. The purpose of the MOU is to define FTE allocations for school psychologists
and social workers according to the school size which will serve to bridge the coordination of
effective MTSS systems across the district.
EXPLANATION
This MOU is based on the ideal standards from the Practice Model of the National Association
of School Psychologists. With implementation of the Practice Model and appropriate FTE
allocation, the school psychologist and social worker will be uniquely positioned to bridge
special education and MTSS, both academically and behaviorally, across all tiers of support.
"The comprehensive implementation of school psychological services has consistently shown to
support teachers' ability to teach and students' ability to learn, and is a cost effective investment
in the success of all students." NASP 2010 Model for Comprehensive and Integrated School
Psychological Services, NASP Practice Model Overview.
In order to align the FTE of school psychologists and social workers with the purpose of
specifically bridging MTSS and Special Education we recommend school psychologist and
social worker allocations be based on school size formulas. A tiered approach will be used to
implement recommendations. For the 2021-2022 school year High Schools will be prioritized.
By September 15, 2021, a committee will be formed and meet to discuss recommendations for
Middle School and Elementary School FTE allocations for the 2022-2023 school year.
School psychologist/social worker FTE allocation committee:
The committee will be tasked with research of the NASP Practice Model as it applies to BVSD
special education and MTSS. The committee will make recommendations about FTE allocations
based on school size including potential changes to Elementary and Middle School FTE
allocation. The committee will meet a minimum of 3 times during the school year in order to
provide suggestions for FTE allocation changes at Middle and Elementary School levels prior to
FTE budget allocation.
Committee Membership will be comprised of:
89
===== page 96 =====
BVSD HR administrator
One Special Education director
One Elementary, one Middle School, and one High School principal
BVSD District MTSS coordinator
BVEA members will include--BVEA President and/or Vice President
Three school psychologists and/or social workers, one elementary school teacher/counselor, one
middle school teacher/counselor, and one high school teacher/counselor
High School FTE Allocation Formula:
● 1800+ 2.0
● 1200-1799 1.5
● 750-1199 1.2
● 500-749 1.0
● 350-499 0.8
● 200-349 0.6
● 50-199 0.4
● 0-49 0.1
With the application of the formula, this represents an increase of 1.8 FTE for High Schools for
the 2021-2022 school year. With this increase in FTE the focus of the school psychologist/social
worker role enables schools to make the best use of their skills and expertise. Through
collaboration and consultation with MTSS (and to give) ALL students will gain access to the
services that can help them stay engaged and successful in school.
Estimated Cost: $224,500
DURATION
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVEA
and BVSD. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from
BVEA and BVSD and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by either of the partners
by mutual consent.
Authorized Officials
signature on file signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 5/19/2021 Date: 5/19/2021
90
===== page 97 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
OPPORTUNITY AND ACCESS FOR ALL STAFF
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District (BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association (BVEA)
PURPOSE:
To increase the opportunity and access for all staff to participate in representation on committees,
task forces, the development of curriculum, etc., we agree that innovative approaches will be
used to invite involvement and/or provide a means for access in addition to in-person meetings.
EXPLANATION:
Prior to the COVID-19 Pandemic, every committee, etc. was expected to meet in person. Using
innovative approaches to hold these meetings, equal opportunity and access will be available for
educators. Educators who must meet outside the school day will be paid at the curriculum rate
or will be offered the appropriate leadership credit.
We will gather information and data during the 2021-2022 school year regarding the efficacy of
this MOU. Data to be collected will include but not be limited to the following:
● Did participation in meetings increase?
● Were participants able to join a committee for the first time?
● Did participants appreciate these innovative methods vs. ONLY in-person meetings?
● Do stakeholders feel more engaged using these approaches?
● Did we meet the outcome of a decrease in workload?
DURATION:
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVEA
and BVSD. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from
BVEA and BVSD and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by either of the partners
by mutual consent.
Authorized Officials
signature on file signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 5/19/2021 Date: 5/19/2021
91
===== page 98 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
HIRING, RETAINING, AND SUPPORTING OF TEACHERS OF COLOR
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets for the terms and understanding between the
Boulder Valley School District and the Boulder Valley Education Association for the recruitment,
hiring, and retention of teachers of color.
BACKGROUND
BVSD and BVEA are committed to increasing the number of teachers of color in our
district and supporting our BVSD Strategic Plan Initiative 6a. Define and put into practice
culturally responsive principles and best practices that challenge inequity and bias.
PURPOSE
Support the four point plan and strategies that Human Resources has developed:
1. Recruitment year round
2. Accelerated hiring
3. Retention
4. Identify institutional barriers
This MOU will enable the BVSD and BVEA to work during the 2021-2022 school year to study
current hiring and retention practices and develop a system of support for teachers of color.
DURATION
This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials and will remain in
effect until modified or terminated by either party.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 5/19/2021 Date: 5/19/2021
92
===== page 99 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
HIRING, RETAINING, AND SUPPORTING TEACHERS OF COLOR
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
Purpose
The parties seek a temporary adjustment to the hiring process for the purpose of enhancing diversity. The purpose
of this Memorandum is to introduce modifications to the interview requirements for qualified in-district
applicants. This adjustment seeks to create a more inclusive selection process, thereby increasing the
representation of diverse candidates in the hiring pipeline.
Explanation
Diversity Enhancement Clause: BVSD and BVEA acknowledge the importance of this adjustment as a step
towards increasing the representation of diverse candidates, including employees of color, within the District’s
workforce. During the two-year duration of this MOU, the District commits to collecting and reviewing data to
assess the impact of reducing the minimum number of in-district applicants to be interviewed from three (3) to
two (2). The aim is to determine whether this modification contributes to a measurable increase in the diversity of
candidates advancing to the interview stage.
Language Modification
Section D-16.1: Interview Requirement for In-District Applicants
All qualified in-district applicants for open positions, who are not on probationary status, shall be afforded an
interview opportunity under the following conditions:
● When two (2) or fewer qualified in-district applicants apply for an open position, both shall be
interviewed.
● In cases where more than two (2) qualified in-district applicants apply, at least two (2) of these applicants
will be selected for an interview.
This language shall supersede existing language in the Agreement for the duration of this Memorandum.
Duration
This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials: it is at-will and may be modified or
terminated by mutual consent. Barring premature termination by mutual consent, this MOU shall expire on June
30, 2029.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
93
===== page 100 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
DUAL LANGUAGE EDUCATORS
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets forth the terms and understanding between the
BVSD and BVEA regarding exploring and providing recommendations to enhance compensation
opportunities for dual language educators.
Explanation: BVSD and BVEA acknowledge the challenges associated with hiring, supporting, and
retaining dual language educators. Both parties recognize the additional work these positions entail.
Purpose: The purpose of this MOU is to create a working group to collaboratively explore and
provide recommendations aimed at enhancing working conditions for dual language educators who
teach in dual language programs. This working group will be charged with drafting a comprehensive
set of recommendations outlining the eligibility criteria, compensation framework, and support
mechanisms for dual language educators. Upon conclusion of this period, the working group will
deliver its findings and proposals to relevant stakeholders for further consideration and
implementation.
Working Group Membership: The working group shall consist of no more than sixteen (16)
representatives from relevant stakeholder groups. All educator representatives will be BVEA
members.
● Educators with expertise in dual language education.
● School administrators and district administrators who are responsible for overseeing dual
language programs
● Representatives from BVEA
● Teachers and administrators who are members of CABE
Duration: This MOU is at will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from
BVSD and BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from
BVSD and BVEA, and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners
by mutual consent. In the absence of mutual agreement by the authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA, this MOU shall end on May 31, 2027.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Date Patty Delgado Date
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
94
===== page 101 =====
MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING EXTRA PAY FOR
EXTRA DUTY
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets forth the terms and understanding between the
BVSD and BVEA to collaboratively explore and provide recommendations regarding Extra Pay for
Extra Duty.
Background
Both BVSD and BVEA recognize the need to thoroughly review the current Extra Pay for Extra
Duty section E-11. It is uncertain when the pay rates assigned to existing job descriptions were last
evaluated for equity.
Purpose
This Memorandum of Understanding is to create a working group tasked with conducting a
comprehensive analysis and providing recommendations pertaining to the allocation of pay rates for
Extra Pay for Extra Duty contracts. The primary objective of this working group includes but is not
limited to: modernizing job descriptions, ensuring equitable pay rate, and ensuring that the contract is
in alignment with applicable Colorado State law. This working group will examine current practices
and make informed recommendations aimed at enhancing efficiency and fairness in FTE allocations.
Upon conclusion of this period, the working group will deliver its findings and proposals to relevant
stakeholders for further consideration and implementation.
Working Group Membership
All educator representatives will be BVEA members.
● District Athletics Director
● Superintendent or designee
● BVEA officer
● BVEA Negotiations representative
● One Middle level coach/club
sponsor/teacher
● One Elementary level coach/club
sponsor/teacher
● One High School coach/club
sponsor/teacher
● One K-8 representative
● Co-curricular representative
● Elementary Administrator
● Middle level Administrator
● High School Building Athletic
Director
● One CHSAA Coach
95
===== page 102 =====
Duration
This MOU is at will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD
and BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from
BVSD and BVEA, this working group will operate over a duration of 18 months and will remain in
effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual consent. In the absence of
mutual agreement by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, this MOU shall end on May
31, 2027.
Authorized Officials
Signature on File Signature on File
Dr. Rob Anderson Date Patty Delgado Date
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
96
===== page 103 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
FILLING VACANCIES: D-16 AND 16.1
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
Purpose
The parties seek temporary adjustment to the hiring process for purposes of enhancing
diversity. The purpose of this Memorandum is to introduce modifications to the interview
requirements for qualified in-district applicants. This adjustment seeks to create a more
inclusive selection process, thereby increasing the representation of diverse candidates in the
hiring pipeline.
Explanation
Diversity Enhancement Clause: BVSD and BVEA acknowledge the importance of this
adjustment as a step towards increasing the representation of diverse candidates, including
employees of color, within the District’s workforce. During the two-year duration of this
MOU, the District commits to collecting and reviewing data to assess the impact of reducing
the minimum number of in-district applicants to be interviewed from three (3) to two (2). The
aim is to determine whether this modification contributes to a measurable increase in the
diversity of candidates advancing to the interview stage.
Language Modification
Section D-16.1: Interview Requirement for In-District Applicants
All qualified in-district applicants for open positions, who are not on probationary status, shall
be afforded an interview opportunity under the following condition:
● When two (2) or fewer qualified in-district applicants apply for an open position, both
shall be interviewed.
● In cases where more than two (2) qualified in-district applicants apply, at least two (2)
of these applicants will be selected for an interview.
This language shall supersede existing language in the Agreement for the duration of this
Memorandum.
Duration
This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials: it is at-will and
97
===== page 104 =====
may be modified or terminated by mutual consent. Barring premature termination by mutual
consent, this MOU shall expire on June 30, 2026.
Authorized Officials
Signature on File Signature on File
Dr. Rob Anderson Date Patty Delgado Date
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
98
===== page 105 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Middle-Level Planning
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District (BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association (BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets the terms and understanding between the
BVSD and BVEA to increase planning time for teachers at the Middle School level.
Background
BVSD and BVEA acknowledge that past political decisions have caused significant planning
time disparities for middle school teachers. Both groups agree that ample teacher-directed and
collaborative planning time is crucial for high-quality instruction, aligning with the District’s
Strategic Plan.
Purpose
This MOU outlines the terms for the disbursement of $1,150,000 to District middle schools.
These funds are designated exclusively for the implementation of additional planning time for
middle-level teachers within the school day. Planning periods will be largely, employee-
directed and must meet the guidelines of section C-5.1, while remaining planning periods can
serve as a flexible opportunity for collaborative planning among teachers. Whenever feasible,
it is advisable to enlist licensed staff for teaching study halls, advisory sessions, and similar
student support programs. Middle schools are encouraged to utilize their site-based leadership
committees to review schedules annually, at which time middle schools opting for non-
standard schedules must use consensus-based decision-making among staff and administration.
Such schools will retain per-pupil funding even if they opt out of the standard 6 of 8-period
schedule.
Funding
BVSD will continue to disburse $1,150,000 of ongoing funds in the fall of each academic year
to middle schools. Every effort shall be made to increase this amount as yearly budgets are
developed. Monies will be allocated on a per-pupil basis. In buildings where additional
resources above per-pupil funding are required to run the 6 of 8 model using licensed staff,
administrators may request additional funding needed as is agreed upon amongst a scheduling
consultant, building administrator, and superintendent (or designee).
Duration
his MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA, and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by
mutual consent In the absence of mutual agreement by the authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA, this MOU shall end on May 31, 2027.
99
===== page 106 =====
Authorized Officials
Dr. Rob Anderson Date Patty Delgado Date
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
100
===== page 107 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ABC Rotation
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
Background:
BVSD and BVEA agree to reexamine the ABC rotation schedule in light of declining enrollment. This
schedule has created challenges for elementary schools with fewer than three rounds of specials,
including unassigned time, travel inefficiencies for specialists, and disruptions to instruction. As part of
this review, BVSD and BVEA are exploring alternative models that reduce scheduling inefficiencies,
address travel time concerns, while maintaining planning time for educators.
Purpose: The purpose of this MOU is to create and implement an ongoing representative advisory
council - Elementary Specials Advisory Council (ESAC) which will meet on a regular basis to develop
guiding principles to inform the specialist scheduling process such as (but not limited to) the use of
unassigned time, traveling, efficient use of FTE and related schedule options.
The function of the Council is advisory. The Council shall make recommendations to the
Superintendent’s Cabinet for consideration.
ESAC membership will include members of BVEA that represent the following positions:
● Elementary Art,
● Elementary Music
● Elementary PE
● BVEA President or Designee
ESAC membership will also include:
● BVSD Coordinator of Fine and Performing Arts and Physical Education
● BVSD Elementary administrators from a diverse representation of sites.
There will be an application process for interested parties. Applications will be reviewed and chosen by
the Executive Board for appointment by the President. If there is no applicant for one of the vacancies,
recommendations will come to the Executive Board and the President will appoint. Appointments will
be for 3 years, with no term limits and will replace 1/3 of the members each year to maintain historical
knowledge on the Committee.
The Chairperson/s of the Elementary Specials Advisory Council shall be elected by the Council
members. The operating rules shall be established by the Council.
Meetings shall be held once monthly September through May according to the schedule set by the
current members of the Council and a Superintendent’s Cabinet member. Meeting dates may be changed
or additional meetings scheduled when necessity requires, by mutual agreement.
101
===== page 108 =====
Duration and Term: .
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual
consent. This MOU shall end on July 31st, 2026.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: ________________________ Date: _________________________
102
===== page 109 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Change of Pay Status Section E-40
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets forth the terms and understanding between the BVSD and
BVEA regarding Section E-40.4 of the negotiated agreement.
Purpose: BVSD and BVEA acknowledge the change in hours and qualifying credits for employees receiving
horizontal movement. This MOU changes the current language in section E-40.4 (a.) by reducing the amount of
hours needed for an employee to accrue 1 credit. The following change is set forth: BVSD Professional Learning
Salary and Leadership Credits shall be earned in the following manner: Where one (1) credit is equal to 15
hours; 0.5 credit is equal to 7.5 hours; .025 credit is equal to 3.75 hours. This MOU applies to coursework that
begins on or after January 1, 2025, and to coursework that concludes after January 1, 2025.
Duration: This MOU is at will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, and
will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual consent.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file_
Dr. Rob Anderson Date David Stewart Date
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
103
===== page 110 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
STANDARDIZED BENEFITS LANGUAGE
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District (BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association (BVEA)
Purpose:
This MOU formalizes the agreement between BVSD, the Boulder Valley Education Association (BVEA),
Boulder Valley Classified Employees Association (BVCEA), Boulder Valley Paraeducator Association (BVPA),
and Boulder Valley Educational Office Professionals (BVEOP), to adopt a shared approach to benefits provisions
that apply to all employees.
This effort aims to streamline and standardize the benefits language, ensuring that all groups have consistent
understanding and equitable access to the district’s benefits offerings, while also addressing the fiscal realities and
healthcare needs of BVSD’s diverse workforce.
Strategic Plan Connections:
This MOU aligns with the BVSD strategic priorities of fostering equity and transparency in the district’s
operations, ensuring fiscal responsibility, and supporting the well-being of all employees.
Working Group Composition:
The benefits language in this MOU has been developed collaboratively by a task force composed of:
● Two representatives from each bargaining unit: BVEA, BVCEA, BVPA, BVEOP
● Three district HR and finance experts
● One external benefits consultant
● One legal advisor
Shared Benefits Language:
The groups have agreed that the following common language will be implemented in all negotiated agreements
across the district regarding employee benefits:
1. Medical Insurance:
“The District shall pay 100% of the employee-only premium for at least one plan provided by the District’s group
medical insurance carrier(s) for eligible employees recommended by the Benefits Committee and approved by the
Board of Education.”
“Applicable employee and dependent premiums shall be paid through the payroll deduction process.”
2. Dental Insurance:
“The District shall pay 100% of the employee-only premium for at least one plan provided by the District’s group
dental insurance carrier for eligible employees.”
“Applicable dependent premiums shall be paid by the employee through the payroll deduction process.”
3. Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment:
“The District will provide group life and accidental death and dismemberment coverage for eligible employees at
no cost to the employee.”
4. District Premium Paid - Annual Increase:
“District paid premium will be increased by a maximum of up to the lesser amount of:
• Two (2) times the Denver-Aurora-Lakewood CPI used for determining inflation under Article X, Section 20 of
the Colorado Constitution, or 5%.”
104
===== page 111 =====
5. Employee Assistance Program (EAP):
“The District will provide an Employee Assistance Program (EAP) with counseling services for eligible
employees at no cost to the employee.”
6. Flexible Spending Accounts (FSA):
“The District will maintain a Section 125 Medical Flexible Spending Account (FSA) between January 1 and
December 31 of each contract year.
● Open enrollment will be held every November 1-30.
● Employees who are active on November 30 and complete open enrollment by November 30 will receive a
dollar-for-dollar matching contribution up to a maximum of $120 from the District.
● A dependent care flexible spending account (DCA) is also available to employees.”
7. Long-Term Disability Insurance:
“The District will provide at least one group long-term disability insurance plan for eligible employees at no cost
to the employee.”
8. Benefits Committee:
“Each unit will have up to three (3) representatives on the Benefits Committee. The Benefits Committee will
make decisions by consensus. The Benefits Committee shall meet regarding general contractual insurance
matters. The District Insurance Consultant may be requested to attend these meetings. The Benefits Committee
will meet annually in September to determine the meeting calendar for that fiscal year.”
Duration:
This MOU shall take effect upon signature by authorized representatives from BVSD and all bargaining units
listed above. The MOU will remain in effect until July 31, 2026, unless modified or terminated by mutual consent
of the parties involved.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file ____________
Dr. Rob Anderson Date
Superintendent
Signature on file ____________
David Stewart Date
BVEA President
105
===== page 112 =====
Memorandum of Understanding
Compensation: Revised Salary Schedule 2026
Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets forth the terms and understanding between the BVSD
and BVEA to establish terms for compensation on the Revised Salary Schedule of 2026.
Background
Both BVEA and BVSD recognize that the School Finance Act of 2024 has dramatically altered the
funding picture for BVSD. Together, we are implementing a revised Unit B salary schedule to respond
to this financial landscape in a manner that continues to compensate Unit B employees on par with other
professionals
Purpose
This provision is intended to lay out agreed-upon terms by which Unit B employees will transfer from
the current salary schedule to the revised salary schedule. Additionally, this MOU defines the rules of
vertical and horizontal movement within the revised schedule for Unit B employees.
Terms:
1. Employees in lanes BA through MA+48 will use their 2025–26 base salary as the starting point.
Each employee will be placed in the cell on the revised salary schedule within their lane that
provides the next highest salary. That cell will then be increased by 1% (COLA) to determine the
employee’s 2026–27 base salary. No employee in the BA–MA+48 lanes will receive less than a
$1,500 increase. If the calculated increase is less than $1,500, a supplemental stipend will be
added to bring the total increase to $1,500. For the 2026–27 school year, this placement will
constitute the employee’s step advancement.
2. Employees in the MA+60 lane will use their 2024–25 base salary as the starting point. Each
employee will be placed in the MA+60 lane of the revised salary schedule at the cell that
provides the next highest salary. That cell will then be increased by 1% (COLA) to determine the
employee’s 2026–27 base salary. No employee in the MA+60 lane will receive less than a
$2,500 increase. If the calculated increase is less than $2,500, a supplemental stipend will be
added to bring the total increase to $2,500. For the 2026–27 school year, this placement will
constitute the employee’s step advancement.
3. Employees whose salaries fall in lanes BA through MA+12, submitting approved credits, can
move horizontally no more than once per academic year, unless their credits are part of an
approved degree program. Those applying for a horizontal move with credits in an approved
degree or certification program can move horizontally up to two lanes in one academic year (q.v.
E-40.4(d)).
4. Employees whose salaries fall in MA+24, MA+36, or MA+48 lanes, submitting approved
credits, can move horizontally no more than once in two academic years unless their credits are
106
===== page 113 =====
part of an approved degree program. Those applying for a horizontal move with credits in an
approved degree or certification program can move horizontally once every two academic years,
but can move two lanes during the eligibility year (qv. E-40.4(d)).
5. The two-year “clock” on horizontal movement for lanes MA+24-36, MA+36-48, and MA+48-60
shall begin on August 1, 2026.
6. The transition to the revised salary schedule will constitute the employees’ step for the 26/27
school year.
7. Employees on the “Grandfathered Yellow Cell” schedule whose salaries are equal to or less than
those in the corresponding lane of the revised schedule will be moved out of the yellow cells and
placed at the next highest salary in that same lane on the revised schedule.
8. Employees in the “Grandfathered Yellow Cell” schedule whose salary is greater than any salary
in the corresponding lane of the revised schedule shall continue to be compensated along the
lines of the existing rules for the “Grandfathered Yellow Cells” (qv. Sec. E-1.2). The salaries of
those in the yellow cells will be adjusted for COLA by 1.0% (one percent). They will not be
restricted in horizontal movement in any “yellow cell” lanes; they can submit approved credits to
advance one lane per academic year or up to two lanes if all credits used for advancement are
part of an approved degree or certification program.
9. Employees in the BA columns who transition to a higher cell in their new lane will be eligible
for increased tuition reimbursement. For each of the next three (3) years, these employees will
receive priority consideration to receive tuition reimbursement of up to $2000 per year (q.v.
Section E-38).
10. Employees in the BA columns who finish a Master's degree program by the summer semester of
2026 shall be allowed to move horizontally on the MA column of the 2025-2026 salary schedule
before transferring to the revised salary schedule.
11. Unless stated above, horizontal and vertical movement on the salary schedule shall otherwise
proceed as stated in the 2026-2029 BVEA Agreement.
Duration
The above provisions will remain in effect for leave purposes through the 2028-2029 school year, unless
extended or incorporated into the BVEA/BVSD Negotiated Agreement. This MOU is at-will and may
be modified by written mutual consent of authorized officials from BVEA and BVSD. This MOU shall
become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from the BVEA and BVSD and will remain
in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual consent. In the absence of
mutual agreement by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, this MOU shall end July 31, 2029.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
107
===== page 114 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
WAGE CLAIM TIMELINES AND PROCEDURES
In Partnership Between
Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
Background
This MOU is an extension of the grievance filed by BVEA in Fall 2025 regarding the payout of annual leave
(Grievance B-2526-01). Fulfillment of the MOU constitutes the remaining relief of the grievance.
Purpose
The purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) is to explore and conclude discussion regarding
clear, mutually agreed-upon expectations and procedures regarding the resolution of wage underpayments and
overpayments for Unit B employees. This MOU shall establish the terms of future claims involving alleged wage
discrepancies as follows:
1. Agreed-Upon Recovery Window. The Parties agree to discuss a recommended two-year limitation period, in
accordance with the relevant statute.
2. Establishment of Mitigating Circumstances. The parties agree to discuss potential deviations from the two-year
limitation in exceptional circumstances, including fraud.
3. Placement and Relationship to Governing Documents. The parties agree that this work shall address the issue
of housing provisions in the Agreement, Board Policy, or other governing document.
4. Wage Claim Outcomes. The parties agree to discuss, including potential structured repayment plans for
employee payments to the District.
5. Communication and Training. The Parties will collaborate to provide guidance to relevant administrative and
payroll personnel regarding the implementation of this MOU.
Term and Duration
This MOU shall become effective upon signature by both parties and shall remain in effect until June 30, 2027.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
108
===== page 115 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Secondary Ratios
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets forth the terms and understanding between the BVSD and
BVEA
Background: BVSD and BVEA acknowledge that the contract language on secondary caseloads that defines
secondary caseload limits in terms of 775 student contacts per week was adopted. At that time, prior to block
schedules being widely adopted, these guidelines strongly inferred class size guidelines of 31 in high school and
26 in middle school. BVSD district staff have worked with high schools to create various schedule options to
meet the required instructional minutes as determined by the state. At the same time, increasing graduation
requirements under CDE guidelines, declining enrollment, and tighter FTE allocations have increased the pressure
to, and design and implement master schedules that equitably limit teacher caseloads Moreover, when a block
period counts as only one student contact, caseloads can rise to as high as 193 students, not including seminar
contacts—over 25% above the original intent of the language. This raises a critical question: how do excessive
caseloads affect the student experience?
Purpose: BVEA and BVSD agree to create a working group to explore how to address secondary ratios, to
explore the issues, and make recommendations around maintaining reasonable secondary teacher/student ratios.
Working Group Membership
All educators of the working group need to be BVEA members. This group shall consist of no more than fourteen
(14) members. This group shall include:
● Secondary principals (with a representative from each of the various programs)
● Secondary classroom teachers from a variety of middle and high schools
● District Expert in scheduling
● Superintendent or designee
● BVEA officer or designee
● Counselors from middle and high schools
Duration: This MOU is at will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, and
will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual consent. In the absence of
mutual agreement by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, this MOU shall end on February 1, 2027,
for implementation in the 2027-2028 school year.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
109
===== page 116 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Hiring New Educators
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) outlines the agreement between BVSD and BVEA to increase the
recruitment and hiring of new and first-year educators within the district.
Background
To promote long-term sustainability of the Unit B salary schedule, both parties agree that current hiring practices
should be reexamined. Improving the recruitment of newer educators supports the district’s financial stability,
strengthens the future of the teaching profession, and encourages emerging educators to build their careers in BVSD.
Purpose
This one-year, renewable Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) authorizes BVSD to prioritize the hiring of
educators who are new to the district and in their first year of the profession. The purpose of this agreement is to
promote the long-term sustainability of the current salary schedule by hiring individuals who are not placed at the
highest salary levels.
Explanation
After several months of work on the Revised Salary Schedule subcommittee, BVSD and BVEA have concluded
that redistributing educators more evenly across the entirety of the salary schedule is a high-leverage strategy that
will help with the schedule’s sustainability. Creating the conditions to attract and hire a higher percentage of newer
educators will accomplish this effect over time.
As a result, the parties agree to temporarily suspend provisions within Section D-16.1 of the Agreement, which
states, “All qualified in-district, non-probationary applicants will be interviewed unless more than three (3) apply,
in which case at least three (3) will be interviewed.”
For the duration of this MOU, the rights identified in D-16.1 will be suspended during an early hiring window. For
2026, the early hiring window will be defined as from January 1st to May 8th; for subsequent years, the early hiring
window will be defined as from January 1st to April 30th. This language also supersedes the MOU: “Hiring,
Retaining, and Supporting of Teachers of Color,” which is set to expire on June 30th, 2029. Within this window,
BVSD will work with BVEA to attract, recruit, and hire newer educators centrally and then develop a process to
place these educators within the district based on available vacancies and school fit.
We understand that this represents a change from the site-based hiring that traditionally has been the method to hire
new teachers in our district. We are collectively committed to the support and success of all new teachers hired
through this process and will continue to work together to create the right culture and support within BVSD to
ensure their success.
Purpose of the Central Hiring Committee
110
===== page 117 =====
A joint working group will study and recommend improvements to hiring and placement of teachers who are
entering the profession. This includes student teachers completing their preparation, bachelor-degree only
candidates, individuals pursuing alternative licensure, and candidates pursuing a second career in education.
The intent is not to provide preference or exclude candidates based on age or degree level; it is to strengthen and
diversify BVSD’s educator pipeline by growing future teachers from within, expanding access to the profession,
and creating consistent support for those beginning their careers in BVSD.
Connections to District Strategic Priorities
The work of the Working Group supports BVSD’s strategic goals to:
• Attract and retain a highly skilled and diverse workforce.
• Strengthen recruitment and hiring systems aligned to student outcomes.
• Build a positive, supportive, and inclusive environment for educators beginning their careers
.
Working Group Membership The Working Group will include no more than ten (10) representatives,
including:
● Representation from the professional development department
● Human Resources representatives
● School administrators
● BVEA leadership
● Teachers representing multiple grade levels and content areas
● Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources or designee
● Additional participants or subject-matter experts may be invited as needed.
Duration
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This Memorandum of Understanding is effective upon signature by authorized representatives of
Boulder Valley School District and Boulder Valley Education Association and shall remain in effect
through July 31, 2026. Thereafter, this MOU shall automatically renew for successive one-year terms
unless either party provides written notice of its intent to suspend or non-renewal no later than May 31st
for the subsequent year. Written notice may be provided via email or other written communication
between the authorized representatives or designees of the parties. Such written notice from either party
shall create mutual agreement for interim negotiations starting no later than August 1st.
Authorized Officials
Signature on File Signature on File
____________________ ____________________
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
111
===== page 118 =====
Memorandum of Understanding
Leave of Absence for Other Employment
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets forth the terms and understanding between the BVSD
and BVEA to establish terms for Leave of Absence for Other Employment.
Purpose
The Parties agree to pilot limited modifications to the existing provisions governing unpaid leave of absence for
other employment. This pilot is intended to allow the District to evaluate whether limited flexibility can be
offered in a manner that does not impair staffing stability, instructional continuity, or District operations.
Scope
This MOU applies only to requests for unpaid leave of absence for other employment. All other leave provisions
in the negotiated agreement remain unchanged.
Eligibility
To be eligible to request leave under this MOU, an educator must:
a. be a Unit B employee.
b. have completed at least six (6) consecutive years of certified, contracted employment with the District as of the
requested leave start date.
c. be in active employment status at the time of application.
d. not be on a performance improvement plan, or active disciplinary status at the time of application.
e. not have previously been granted a leave of absence for other employment during their employment with the
District.
Application Process
An educator requesting leave under this MOU shall submit a completed Leave of Absence Request Form to
Human Resources, signed by the educator’s supervisor, and accompanied by any documentation required by the
District.
● For leave beginning at the start of a school year, the application must be submitted no later than April 1
preceding the school year for which the leave is requested.
● For leave beginning mid-year, the application must be submitted no later than ninety (90) calendar days
before the requested start date.
The timelines above may be adjusted by the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources or designee, only in
exceptional circumstances.
Employment During Leave
Employees on approved leave of absence under this MOU may seek and obtain employment outside the District
during the period of leave. Leave under this MOU is unpaid and may be granted for no more than one (1) school
year, not to exceed two (2) semesters within the same school year. Leave under this MOU may be granted only
one (1) time during an educator’s employment with the District. Leave under this MOU shall not be extended
beyond the approved period.
112
===== page 119 =====
Status During Leave
An educator on approved leave for other employment under this MOU:
a. shall receive no salary or District-paid benefits,
b. may continue District health, dental, and vision insurance at the educator’s own expense, consistent with
existing contract language and applicable plan rules.
c. shall not accrue salary step advancement, service credit, or other employment benefits during the leave, except
as otherwise required by law or the negotiated agreement.
d. shall not engage in District work for compensation during the leave unless separately approved by the District.
e. shall remain subject to applicable reporting obligations regarding licensure status and any legal or ethical issues
that could affect District employment.
Return Rights
Upon return from approved leave under this MOU, the educator shall not be advanced on the salary schedule
unless the educator taught one complete semester or more for the District during the school year in which the
leave occurred.
Upon return, the educator shall be placed in accordance with existing negotiated agreement language governing
return from leave, with every reasonable attempt to return the educator to the same school, position, assignment,
or duties, aligned with the District operational needs.
Intent to Return
No later than April 1 of the school year in which the leave is taken, the educator shall notify Human Resources in
writing of the intent to return. If the District offers employment consistent with the negotiated agreement and this
MOU, and the educator fails to respond within the timeline established by the District, such failure to respond
shall constitute a resignation.
Position Status
Whenever feasible, during the approved leave period, the District may fill the employee’s position on a temporary
basis.
Benefits and Status During Leave
Leave under this MOU shall be unpaid unless otherwise required by law or separate agreement.
Benefits continuation shall be governed by applicable law, District policy, and plan documents.
Duration
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVEA and BVSD. This
MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from the BVEA and BVSD and will
remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual consent. In the absence of
mutual agreement by the authorized officials from (list partners), this MOU shall end on April 1, 2030.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
113
===== page 120 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CTE (Career and Technical Education)
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets forth the terms and understanding between the BVSD and
BVEA.
Background:
Since the implementation of the Professional Wage Salary Schedule in BVSD, educators in Career and Technical
Education (CTE) programs, particularly Apex/trades, have faced challenges advancing horizontally on the salary
schedule. The current structure primarily supports lane advancement through master’s programs focused on K–12
education. As a result, the current salary schedule does not account for the pathways common in CTE fields.
Many CTE educators come from trades that require specialized education, industry licensure, and extensive
professional experience outside of a traditional K–12 master’s degree. Under the current system, these
qualifications are not fully recognized or honored.
Purpose:
This MOU establishes the following:
1. A viability study of creating a separate CTE salary schedule and/or ways for the CTE teachers to move
horizontally and vertically on the current salary schedule.
2. To submit for horizontal movement for the 2027/2028 academic year, BVSD and BVEA will establish an
approval process designed specifically for CTE educators and aligned with the existing course approval
committee BVSD uses to approve K-12-related coursework. This committee will meet in order to
examine, analyze, and determine how and which specialized education, industry licensures, and
professional development can qualify as horizontal movements on the Professional Wage Salary
Schedule. This committee would also be charged with determining tuition reimbursement for CTE
teachers as defined in section E-38. Committee members will be as follows:
● 1 Director of Career and Technical Education
● 1 Professional Learning
● 1 Apex/CTE teacher from skills trade (in an advisory role)
● 1 Apex/CTE Health Sciences (in an advisory role)
● BVEA President or designee
● 1 principal from a comprehensive high school
● 1 HR representative or designee
● 1 CTE teacher from a comprehensive high school
3. BVSD and BVEA agree to update the CTE language in section E-13, “Qualifications and Requirements
of Vocational-Technical Salary Schedule,” through the Labor Management Team. Such updates will
reflect the current realities of CTE and be concluded for ratification by January 1, 2029.
114
===== page 121 =====
4. This MOU authorizes a market analysis of current Apex/CTE positions as of August 1, 2026, for which
employee qualifications are not fully recognized or reflected under the current professional salary
schedule. The purpose of this analysis is to ensure competitive and appropriate placement on the salary
schedule. These positions will be identified by the program director of CTE.
Duration: This MOU is at will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, and
will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual consent. In the absence of
mutual agreement by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, this MOU shall end on July 31st, 2029.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
115
===== page 122 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Hard to Fill Positions
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) outlines the agreement between BVSD and BVEA to
increase the recruitment and hiring of new and first-year educators within the district.
Background
Boulder Valley School District recognizes that certain certified teaching positions are consistently
difficult to hire and retain high-quality staff. These roles are critical to student access, specialized
programming, legal compliance, workforce readiness, and the district’s ability to provide stable services
to students and families.
Purpose
The parties agree to the implementation of a targeted hard-to-fill retention stipend for identified certified
teaching positions. These designations reflect sustained, multi-year patterns that signal structural staffing
challenges—not temporary fluctuations. The purpose of this stipend is to support retention in roles
where vacancy trends, applicant pools, specialized qualifications, program needs, and retention
challenges indicate a need for additional short-term support.
The parties have identified the following certified teaching assignments for targeted hard-to-fill retention
stipends.
1. Eligible Special Education Teachers
Licensed special education teachers (case managers) with an assigned special education caseload in the
following programs or sites are eligible:
● Multi-Intensive programs
● Autism programs
● ICAN programs
● Halcyon
● Transitions
2. Eligible Dual Language Teachers
Licensed teachers assigned to a position in a Dual Language program at the following schools:
● University Hill Elementary:
● Pioneer Bilingual Elementary: Entire staff
● Columbine Elementary, only teachers assigned to a Dual Language program
116
===== page 123 =====
● Manhattan Middle School, only teachers assigned to a Dual Language program
● Casey Middle School, only teachers assigned to a Dual Language program
● Angevine Middle School, only teachers assigned to a Dual Language program
This stipend applies only to teachers serving in the identified Dual Language assignments. At
Columbine, eligibility is limited to teachers assigned to a Dual Language classroom.
3. Eligible Career and Technical Education Teachers at Apex
Career and Technical Education teachers assigned to teach CTE programming at Apex. These roles require
industry-specific expertise and instructional credentials within the Apex model. This stipend is connected to the
district’s hard-to-fill designation for CTE teaching assignments at Apex.
Stipend Amount and FTE Proration
Eligible certified teachers in the identified Special Education, Dual Language, and CTE at APEX assignments
may receive up to $4,000 for the 2026–2027 school year, paid in two installments.
● Up to $2,000 for the first semester eligibility
● Up to $2,000 for second-semester eligibility
The stipend for certified staff will be prorated based on the employee’s FTE in the eligible assignment at the time
eligibility is reviewed.
Examples:
● 1.0 FTE eligible assignment: $2,000 per semester
● .75 FTE eligible assignment: $1,500 per semester
● .50 FTE eligible assignment: $1,000 per semester
If an employee serves part of their FTE in an eligible assignment and part of their FTE in a non-eligible
assignment, only the eligible FTE will be used to calculate the stipend.
First Semester Eligibility
To receive the first semester stipend, eligible certified employees must:
● Have returned from the 2025–2026 school year or have been hired into an eligible assignment by
September 1, 2026
● Remain actively employed in an eligible assignment through December 31, 2026
First semester stipends will be paid in January 2027.
Second Semester Eligibility
To receive the second semester stipend, eligible certified employees must:
● Be employed in an eligible assignment by January 5, 2027
● Remain actively employed in an eligible assignment through the last day of the 2026–2027
school year
Second semester stipends will be paid in June 2027
117
===== page 124 =====
Annual Review
BVSD will evaluate the stipend's effectiveness and sustainability annually. The parties agree to ongoing
conversations about the renewal and/or potential modifications to this MOU with a target of
commencing conversations by January 8, 2027. The review may include:
● Vacancy data
● Applicant pool data
● Hiring timelines
● Retention data
● Transfer and separation trends
● Program staffing needs
● Budget and fiscal capacity
● Market and comparable district information, when available
Based on this review, the district may continue, revise, expand, reduce, or discontinue hard-to-fill
retention stipends in future years.
Duration
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This Memorandum of Understanding is effective upon signature by authorized representatives of
the parties and shall remain in effect through July 31, 2027 unless otherwise extended and/or modified by
written mutual consent of the parties..
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
118
===== page 125 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Hard to Fill Long-Term Study
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) outlines the agreement between BVSD and BVEA to discuss broader
compensation considerations related to hard to fill specialized programs.
Background
Boulder Valley School District recognizes that certain certified teaching positions are consistently difficult to hire
and retain high-quality staff. These roles are critical to student access, specialized programming, legal compliance,
workforce readiness, and the district’s ability to provide stable services to students and families. Educators in these
roles have consistently shared the extra responsibilities that these positions require.
Purpose
This MOU establishes the following, including but not limited to:
1. Study longer-term compensation questions related to teachers in dual language programs and
licensed special education teachers in specialized programs.
2. Study workload, extra responsibilities, and hard-to-fill data.
3. Provide long-term recommendations and solutions.
Eligible Special Education Teachers in the following programs
● Multi-Intensive programs
● Autism programs
● ICAN programs
● Halcyon
● Transitions
Eligible Dual Language Teachers
● University Hill Elementary
● Pioneer Bilingual Elementary
● Columbine Elementary, only teachers assigned in a Dual Language Program
● Manhattan Middle School, only teachers assigned in a Dual Language Program
● Casey Middle School, only teachers assigned in a Dual Language program
● Angevine Middle School, only teachers assigned in a Dual Language program
Working Group Membership: The Working Group will include no more than ten (10) representatives,
including:
Dual Language Working Group Membership
● Educators with expertise in dual language education, from the elementary and middle school levels
119
===== page 126 =====
● School administrators and district administrators who are responsible for overseeing dual language
programs
● Representative from BVEA
● Human Resources representative or designee
Special Education Working Group Membership
● Executive Director of Special Education or Designee
● Educators from each school level: elementary, K/8, middle level, and high school
○ Representation from a variety of specialized programs
● Principal from each school level
● Human Resources representative or designee
Duration: This MOU is at will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, and
will remain in effect until modified or terminated by any one of the partners by mutual consent. In the absence of
mutual agreement by the authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, this MOU shall end on July 31st, 2029.
Authorized Officials
Signature on File Signature on File
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date:4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
120
===== page 127 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
HIRING, RETAINING, AND SUPPORTING TEACHERS OF COLOR
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
Purpose
The parties seek a temporary adjustment to the hiring process for the purpose of enhancing diversity.
The purpose of this Memorandum is to introduce modifications to the interview requirements for
qualified in-district applicants. This adjustment seeks to create a more inclusive selection process,
thereby increasing the representation of diverse candidates in the hiring pipeline.
Explanation
Diversity Enhancement Clause: BVSD and BVEA acknowledge the importance of this adjustment as a
step towards increasing the representation of diverse candidates, including employees of color, within
the District’s workforce. During the two-year duration of this MOU, the District commits to collecting
and reviewing data to assess the impact of reducing the minimum number of in-district applicants to be
interviewed from three (3) to two (2). The aim is to determine whether this modification contributes to a
measurable increase in the diversity of candidates advancing to the interview stage.
Language Modification
Section D-16.1: Interview Requirement for In-District Applicants
All qualified in-district applicants for open positions, who are not on probationary status, shall be
afforded an interview opportunity under the following conditions:
● When two (2) or fewer qualified in-district applicants apply for an open position, both shall be
interviewed.
● In cases where more than two (2) qualified in-district applicants apply, at least two (2) of these
applicants will be selected for an interview.
This language shall supersede existing language in the Agreement for the duration of this
Memorandum.
Duration
This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials: it is at-will and may be
modified or terminated by mutual consent. Barring premature termination by mutual consent, this MOU
shall expire on June 30, 2029.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
121
===== page 128 =====
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Instructional Flexibility and Communication
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
Background
Both BVSD and BVEA recognize that the rapid expansion of district curriculum, coupled with
increased Data-Driven Instruction (DDI) expectations, has led to questions and concerns among
educators regarding professional autonomy, professional judgment, and the ability to respond to student
needs.
Purpose
To provide increased flexibility for teachers, building administrators, and students in relation to
curricular pacing aligned with the scope and sequence of newly adopted district curricula and initiatives,
BVSD and BVEA agree to solicit and consider the experience and counsel of teachers regarding
curriculum rollouts, Data-Driven Instruction (DDI), and the Academics components of the Strategic
Plan. The Parties further agree that such consultation shall occur through the Teacher Advisory Council,
which shall convene no fewer than twice annually, once during the fall semester and once during the
spring semester, for the purposes of gathering feedback and communicating the implementation of any
resulting changes.
Topics to discuss include items such as:
● Educator feedback designed for two-way dialogue regarding topics covered by the Academics
team
○ Discussions on district-wide trends in DDI implementation; planned next steps to
support ongoing refinement
○ Discussions as relevant to pacing calendars & rationale
○ Discussions on intervention plans & implementation in alignment with ‘Next Best Step’
in the Strategic Plan
○ Discussions on curriculum adoption & implementation
Duration
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from BVSD and
BVEA. This Memorandum of Understanding is effective upon signature by authorized representatives of
Boulder Valley School District and Boulder Valley Education Association and shall remain in effect
through July 31, 2029.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson David Stewart
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: 4/30/2026 Date: 4/30/2026
122
===== page 129 =====
Time Appendix Matrix
Categories of TIME – Parameters of TIME
Instructional Time: Full Day Kindergarten – 900 Half-Day K –
Student contact with instructional focus to 450
include classroom instruction, individual Elementary – 968 (excludes K) Secondary
student planning meetings such as 504, TAG, – 1056 hours/year School Year Minimum
IEP, and student and/or parent conferencing. – 160 days
pursuant to CDE regulations
Individual Teacher Planning Time: Planning 4.5 hours/weekly minimum. Every
time that is individually directed to support reasonable effort will be made to provide
instruction. planning periods of meaningful length of
30 minutes.
District/Building Collaboration Model: Based upon shared-decision making at
Schools used a shared decision-making each building (not to compromise
process to develop a model for collaboration individual planning time).
that fits within the contract week
Meeting Time: Not to exceed 60 minutes per week unless
(Staff meetings scheduled as needed on there is a collaborative agreement to meet
Thursdays; staff development; team meetings; beyond the 60 minutes per week. Special
committees, and administration meetings) meetings may be called by principals for
emergencies and shall be kept to a
minimum.
Weekly contracted time: 40 hours/per week
37.5 hours on duty in building inclusive of
a 30 minute duty free lunch
2.5 additional hours are intended to be
individual teacher directed time.
123