
===== page 1 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
BVEA/BVSD Tentative Agreement Summary May 10, 2021
The BVEA Negotiations Team, BVSD Administration, and BVSD Board of Education
reached tentative agreement on the following items during our negotiations process.
This Agreement, effective August 1, 2021 through July 31, 2024, will now be considered
for formal ratification by the BVEA membership and approval by the BVSD Board of
Education.
● Compensation and Benefits
○ COLA = 3% for 2021-2022
○ Horizontal and Vertical movement will continue
○ National Board Certification Stipends 5% to include psychologists and
counselors
National Association of School Psychologists
National Board for Certified Counselors
Phased-in at 2.5% each year for 2021-22 and 2022-23
PREAMBLE
The Boulder Valley Board of Education, the Boulder Valley Education Association, and the
employees of the Boulder Valley School District recognize and declare that it is their mutual aim
to provide a quality education to all pupils of the District. Accordingly, the parties recognize and
agree that the employees, the Board, and the Administration have the responsibility to:
Respect each pupil’s dignity and worth,
Respect each pupil’s right to learn,
Uphold the standards of the profession,
Promote quality teaching.
Boulder Valley Education Association recognizes the development and attainment
of a quality education is a collaborative responsibility and requires mutual
understanding and cooperation among the Boulder Valley School District Board
of Education, the District Administration and the Association. The heart of this
agreement is centered on reciprocal support and communication. When teachers
feel supported and are engaged, the students we teach will be more successful.
Furthermore, we believe that each student is a unique individual who needs a
secure, caring, and stimulating atmosphere in which they mature emotionally,
intellectually, physically and socially and where they have the opportunity to
achieve and succeed academically.
We know that students are more successful when they see themselves at the
front of their classroom. Teachers in Boulder Valley School District will provide
===== page 2 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
culturally responsive teaching and honor the dignity of their students, and
therefore, it is our goal to promote the hiring and retaining of teachers of color
who represent the students they teach.
BVEA, the Board of Education and BVSD have the responsibility to uphold and
honor this bargaining agreement. By doing so, the students of BVSD will have
equitable access to their education which will generate opportunity.
===== page 3 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
SECTION C: DUTIES OF THE EMPLOYEE
C-18 Assignment of Specialists
C-18.1 Special Education
If a special education employee believes and/or has evidence that the
size and/or composition of his/her/their caseload is not consistent with
sound and safe educational practices, he/she/they will request a
meeting with the building principal and/or a designated special
education director to review the situation. When requested the
building administrator and/or designated special education director
shall convene a meeting within ten 10 working days. The review will
consist of consultation and collaboration between the special
education employee and the building administrator and/or special
education director to find a timely solution. Possible solutions could
include compensation for additional workload, paraprofessional
support to address increased student needs, release time for
additional special education paperwork, additional planning time for
progress monitoring, hired assistants for specialists and/or an
increase in FTE to cover the additional caseload. These solutions are
not exhaustive of other mutually agreed upon means to address
caseload. If no agreement is reached to relieve the situation within five (5)
days the issue will be taken to the Designated Director of Special
Education who will review the caseload using the appropriate formula as
well as other factors in order to determine a mutually agreed upon solution
with the employee. If a mutually agreed upon solution is not reached
by the building administration and/or designated special education
director within five (5) working days following the meeting This will be
completed within ten (10) working days. If the special education employee
continues to have concerns, a request for assistance can be made to
BVEA and/or HRD.
The District will make every reasonable effort to meet the following IEP
special education guidelines. Guidelines for IEP caseloads will be
reviewed, yearly by an advisory representative group comprised of
special education teachers, administrators, Human Resources, and
BVEA representation. Guidelines to request an IEP caseload review are
based upon the following numbers:
OT/PT 1:50
PSY/SW 1:50 to be reviewed in 2023 based on MOU language
===== page 4 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
SLP 1:43 Elementary/1:46 Secondary
Resource 1:21 Elementary/1:25 Middle/High School
Multi-intensive 1:10 All levels
ILC – Multi/Autism 1:10 All levels for caseload review
numbers
ICAN 1:10 Elementary/Middle School/1:15 High
School
Day Treatment 1:8
BCBA 1:3 ILC classrooms
ECSE* 1:7*
ECSE ILC 1:10 (1:5 AM and 1:5 PM)
*(BVSD ECSE model of 1:5 students with IEPs per preschool a.m. or p.m.
session, with 1:7 inclusive of mid year eligibility)
Nothing would preclude a teacher requesting a caseload review based on
his/her/their responsibilities, including case management duties.
C-25 SPECIAL EDUCATION Special Education staff will not be required to head
up 504 teams or manage 504 accommodations for non-special education
students. Special Education staff will not be required to maintain individual
MTSS plans or READ plans but are welcome to collaborate with the general
educator.
MTSS is a general education responsibility and initiative, but oftentimes
specialists can be experts in offering interventions. School Psychologists
and social workers will serve as the bridge between MTSS and special
education through process collaboration and consultation with the MTSS
team.
===== page 5 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
SECTION E: COMPENSATION
E-8 NATIONAL BOARD CERTIFICATION
E-8.1 Employees who complete the necessary requirements and are certified
through the National Board Certification program will receive a five percent (5%)
stipend. Such stipend will be effective the semester following submission of
certification to the Human Resources Division and will be paid in equal monthly
installments.
E-8.2 BVSD Employees who have earned their ASHA Certificate of Clinical
Competence and were hired prior to July 31, 2017 will continue to receive a five
percent (5%) stipend as long as they are assigned to an SLP position and they
maintain this certification.
E-8.3 Effective August 1, 2021, Employees in possession of National
Association of School Psychologists (NASP) or National Board for Certified
Counselors (NBCC) certification shall receive an annual stipend equal to
2.5% of the Employee’s annual salary. Effective August 1, 2022, Employees
so certified shall receive an additional 2.5% stipend, thereby totaling a 5%
stipend for the abovementioned certifications.
E-8.4 In order to be eligible for the certifications in E-8.1 and E-8.3,
Employees shall be non-probationary. Coursework required for the above
certifications shall not be creditable for horizontal movement on the salary
schedule. Any current Employees pursuing the above mentioned
certifications as of June 1, 2021 shall be held harmless from these
provisions.
E-8.5 Employees with one of the above certifications shall remain in good
standing with their professional practice. In the event that an Employee so
certified is placed on Level II of the evaluation process (see Sec. D-9 et
seq), the stipend may be suspended until the Employee returns to Level
One.
E-8.6 Employees with one of the above certifications shall be expected to
occupy and remain in a job classification related to the pertinent
certification. Employees who voluntarily transfer out of such a position
may be subject to removal of the stipend.
E-8.7 BVEA and HRD shall review such cases and provide written notice to
Employees impacted by Sec. E-8.5 and E-8.6.
===== page 6 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
SECTION J: FUTURE CONFERENCE AND TERM
J-1 This Agreement shall be in full force and effect from its execution on August 1, 2018
2021 and including July 31, 2021 2024. This Agreement shall automatically continue in
full force and effect annually from year to year unless either of the parties hereto shall
terminate the same in accordance with the procedures outlined in J-2.
J-1.1 If either party shall desire to change any of the provisions of this Agreement, it
shall give written notice as outlined in B-3.
J-1.2 If the parties have not reached an agreement on or before the end of the Contract
or reopening term, all provisions of this Agreement shall remain in effect unless
specifically terminated in accordance with the following procedure.
J-1.3 In October, 2016, the large negotiations group will meet to negotiate Section J.
J-2 TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT: Ten (10) or less working days prior to the termination
date of this Agreement on the first anniversary date or at any time thereafter, if no
Agreement on the questions at issue has been reached, either party may give written
notice to the other party terminating the Agreement not less than ten (10) days after
receipt of notification by registered mail. Such notice shall state the date and hour of
such termination. All provisions of the Agreement shall remain in full force and effect
until the specified time has elapsed. During this period, attempts to reach an Agreement
shall be continued.
J-2.1 If the parties have failed to resolve their differences by the specified date, all
obligations under this Agreement are automatically cancelled.
ACCEPTED AND APPROVED ACCEPTED AND APPROVED
Boulder Valley Education Association
Representing the employees of Boulder Board of Education of the
Valley School District RE2 Boulder Valley Schools
by: by:
President President
Boulder Valley Education Association Board of Education
Boulder Valley School
District RE2
date: date:
===== page 7 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Memorandum of Understanding
Hiring, Retaining, and Supporting of Teachers of Color
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets for the terms and understanding
between the Boulder Valley School District and the Boulder Valley Education
Association for the recruitment, hiring, and retention of teachers of color.
Background
BVSD and BVEA are committed to increasing the number of teachers of color in our
district and supporting our BVSD Strategic Plan Initiative 6a. Define and put into
practice culturally responsive principles and best practices that challenge
inequity and bias.
Purpose
Support the four point plan and strategies that Human Resources has developed
1. Recruitment year round
2. Accelerated hiring
3. Retention
4. Identify institutional barriers
This MOU will enable the BVSD and BVEA to work during the 2021-2022 school year to
study current hiring and retention practices and develop a system of support for
teachers of color.
Duration
This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized officials and will
remain in effect until modified or terminated by either party.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: May 19, 2021 Date: May 19, 2021
===== page 8 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Memorandum of Understanding-Opportunity and Access for All Staff
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District (BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association (BVEA)
PURPOSE:
To increase the opportunity and access for all staff to participate in representation on
committees, task forces, the development of curriculum, etc., we agree that innovative
approaches will be used to invite involvement and/or provide a means for access in
addition to in-person meetings.
EXPLANATION:
Prior to the COVID-19 Pandemic, every committee, etc. was expected to meet in
person. Using innovative approaches to hold these meetings, equal opportunity and
access will be available for educators. Educators who must meet outside the school day
will be paid at the curriculum rate or will be offered the appropriate leadership credit.
We will gather information and data during the 2021-2022 school year regarding the
efficacy of this MOU. Data to be collected will include but not be limited to the following:
● Did participation in meetings increase?
● Were participants able to join a committee for the first time?
● Did participants appreciate these innovative methods vs. ONLY in-person
meetings?
● Do stakeholders feel more engaged using these approaches?
● Did we meet the outcome of a decrease in workload?
DURATION
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from
BVEA and BVSD. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized
officials from BVEA and BVSD and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by
either of the partners by mutual consent.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: May 19, 2021 Date: May 19, 2021
===== page 9 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Memorandum of Understanding-Bridging the Gap of MTSS to Special
Education
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
Purpose:
We believe that there needs to be a bridge between the resources in Special Education
and the implementation of an effective Multi-Tiered Systems of Support. Current FTE
assignments for school psychologists and social workers have not been aligned with our
bargained agreement which states 1:50. The purpose of the MOU is to define FTE
allocations for school psychologists and social workers according to the school size
which will serve to bridge the coordination of effective MTSS systems across the district.
Explanation:
This MOU is based on the ideal standards from the Practice Model of the National
Association of School Psychologists. With implementation of the Practice Model and
appropriate FTE allocation, the school psychologist and social worker will be uniquely
positioned to bridge special education and MTSS, both academically and behaviorally,
across all tiers of support. “The comprehensive implementation of school psychological
services has consistently shown to support teachers’ ability to teach and students’ ability
to learn, and is a cost effective investment in the success of all students.” NASP 2010
Model for Comprehensive and Integrated School Psychological Services, NASP
Practice Model Overview.
In order to align the FTE of school psychologists and social workers with the purpose of
specifically bridging MTSS and Special Education we recommend school psychologist
and social worker allocations be based on school size formulas. A tiered approach will
be used to implement recommendations. For the 2021-2022 school year High Schools
will be prioritized. By September 15, 2021, a committee will be formed and meet to
discuss recommendations for Middle School and Elementary School FTE allocations for
the 2022-2023 school year.
School psychologist/social worker FTE allocation committee:
The committee will be tasked with research of the NASP Practice Model as it applies to
BVSD special education and MTSS. The committee will make recommendations about
FTE allocations based on school size including potential changes to Elementary and
===== page 10 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Middle School FTE allocation. The committee will meet a minimum of 3 times during the
school year in order to provide suggestions for FTE allocation changes at Middle and
Elementary School levels prior to FTE budget allocation.
Committee Membership will be comprised of:
BVSD HR administrator
One Special Education director
One Elementary, one Middle School, and one High School principal
BVSD District MTSS coordinator
BVEA members will include--BVEA President and/or Vice President
Three school psychologists and/or social workers, one elementary school
teacher/counselor, one middle school teacher/counselor, and one high school
teacher/counselor
High School FTE Allocation Formula:
● 1800+ 2.0
● 1200-1799 1.5
● 750-1199 1.2
● 500-749 1.0
● 350-499 0.8
● 200-349 0.6
● 50-199 0.4
● 0-49 0.1
With the application of the formula, this represents an increase of 1.8 FTE for High
Schools for the 2021-2022 school year. With this increase in FTE the focus of the school
psychologist/social worker role enables schools to make the best use of their skills and
expertise. Through collaboration and consultation with MTSS (and to give) ALL students
will gain access to the services that can help them stay engaged and successful in
school.
Estimated Cost: $224,500
Duration:
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from
BVEA and BVSD. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized
officials from BVEA and BVSD and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by
either of the partners by mutual consent.
===== page 11 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Authorized Officials:
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: May 26, 2021 Date: May 26, 2021
===== page 12 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Memorandum of Understanding Assessment
In Partnership Between Boulder Valley School District (BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association (BVEA)
PURPOSE
• To increase collaboration between the District Assessment Team (DAT)
and the District Instructional Leadership Committe (DILT) when
developing the Balanced Assessment System (BAS).
• To develop methods and standards for gathering feedback from
teachers as they implement the BAS.
Explanation
We honor the hard work already begun by the members of the DILT and are committed
to collaborating with the DILT and the DAT.
We recognize the District has made a commitment to developing a BAS that connects
instruction with meaningful assessment which will inform instruction and lead to student
growth.
The DAT and the DILT are committed to working collaboratively to implement the BVSD
BAS and to gather information about its effectiveness and to provide feedback on its
sustainability as it is implemented.
The following BVSD Assessment Principles outline these DAT purposes of assessment:
• Supporting student success through universal instruction
• Supporting student success through screening, intervention, and progress
monitoring
• Supporting student success through educator growth
• Supporting student learning through continuous improvement at the system
level BVSD Assessment Principles
We will gather data over the next year around the implementation of these assessments
and the impact they have on student learning outcomes. As we gather data, we will look
for episodes where teacher voice was included (See sample questions below).
===== page 13 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
The district has committed to having the DAT and the OILT meet at least two times a
year to share progress with the BAS and to gather feedback from teachers.
Possible Questions for teachers to collect feedback
• Were teachers given an opportunity to contribute to the development of the
BAS?
• Did the assessments help guide instruction so that students could
demonstrate measurable growth and close the opportunity gap?
• Are the assessments aligned to the units developed and did they inform
instruction?
• Are the assessments incorporated into the Scope and Sequence and fit in the
instructional models?
• How are time considerations taken into account?
DURATION
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from
BVEA and BVSD. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized
officials from BVEA and BVSD and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by
either of the partners by mutual consent. This MOU will be revisited in one year Spring
2022 and status determined.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: May 19, 2021 Date: May 19, 2021
===== page 14 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Memorandum of Understanding-Boulder Universal
2021-2022
Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets the terms and understanding between
BVSD and BVEA to guarantee that the Boulder Universal (BU) Unit B employees listed
below will not be displaced for the 2022-2023 school year by Unit B employees with
more seniority hired for the 2021-2022 school year.
Employee ID Numbers
15481, 11102, 13183, 4454, 15591, 12258
Background
Due to the COVID19 Pandemic, BU has had an increase in student enrollment;
therefore, more FTE was allocated for BU to hire additional Unit B employees. This
increase in enrollment is projected to decrease once the Pandemic situation is under
control and more students will return to brick and mortar schools.
Purpose
This MOU will guarantee that the original Unit B employees listed above will not be
displaced by Unit B employees with more seniority hired for the 2021-2022 school year
as explained in Section D-19(c) of the Agreement. Any non-probationary teacher so
displaced will be placed into a position within the district. Non-probationary Unit B
employees hired for the 2021-2022 school year will be notified of this MOU.
Duration
This MOU shall become effective August 1, 2021, upon signature by the authorized
officials, and will remain in effect until July 31, 2022.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: May 19, 2021 Date: May 19, 2021
===== page 15 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
Memorandum of Understanding-Middle School Planning
In Partnership Between
Boulder Valley School District
(BVSD)
and
Boulder Valley Education Association
(BVEA)
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) sets for the terms and understanding
between the BVSD and BVEA to increase planning time for teachers at the Middle
School level.
Background
BVSD and BVEA mutually recognize that political decisions and election outcomes 25
years ago have led to major inequities, specifically in terms of planning time, for middle
school teachers in District schools. Our two groups further recognize that sufficient
teacher-directed planning time is essential to the provision of high quality instruction for
all students as outlined by the District’s Strategic Plan. Finally, both groups recognize
their historic commitment to site-based shared decision-making.
Purpose
This MOU will set conditions for planned disbursement to District middle schools of
$1,150,000, with said monies to be utilized exclusively for implementing locally-devised
solutions to increase teacher plan time. Monies will be allocated on a per-pupil basis.
In support of this initiative:
Between August and October 31st, 2021, Middle Schools will use a consensus-style
shared decision-making model to develop plans for how to use their site’s allocated
funds to increase teacher plan time. All schools will use a consistent process with
outside facilitators who are trained in and will use the “Chadwick Method” to reach group
consensus. Building shared decision-making groups will continue to meet in the Spring
semesters of 2022, 2023 and 2024 to monitor and make adjustments to
implementations as needed.
Schools will be encouraged to develop means of increasing teacher planning time in
ways that work best for their respective sites. Avenues to be considered might include
changes to daily instructional schedules; the hiring of a licensed teacher; hiring
Education Support Professionals to supervise Study Halls; hiring Building Substitute
Teachers; and other means as might be devised by the building-level shared decision-
making groups.
Create and implement a district-wide committee by September 21, 2021 charged with
developing recommendations regarding the need for increased planning time for middle
level teachers. Prior to March 1st of 2022, 2023 and 2024 this committee will monitor
===== page 16 =====
2021 Tentative Agreements – Boulder Valley Education Association
and make recommendations for considerations aligned with the budgeting process. The
task force shall consider, but will not be limited to:
● What are the unique needs of middle school students and how can increased
planning time enhance the education experience for these students?
● What practices are currently in place to increase middle school teacher planning
time both as a result of the increase in funding and prior to the increase?
● What resources do we currently provide and which additional resources could be
brought to bear?
● Study of the question of how current district practice aligns with the middle school
essentials and whether our current district leadership and community values call
for further alignment.
The working group shall be composed of twelve (12) members but may be expanded as
needed. The group shall be composed of the following members
6 middle level educators (including from one PK-8 middle school)
2 middle level principals
1 PK-8 principal
1 superintendent or designee
1 association president or vice president
1 member of the BVEA negotiations team
Funding
BVSD will disburse $1,150,000 in August of 2021. For 2022 and 2023 every effort shall
be made to increase this amount as yearly budgets are developed.
Duration
This MOU is at-will and may be modified by mutual consent of authorized officials from
BVSD and BVEA. This MOU shall become effective upon signature by the authorized
officials from BVSD and BVEA, and will remain in effect until modified or terminated by
any one of the partners by mutual consent. In the absence of mutual agreement by the
authorized officials from BVSD and BVEA, this MOU shall end on May 31, 2024.
Authorized Officials
Signature on file Signature on file
Dr. Rob Anderson Terri R. Mulford
BVSD Superintendent BVEA President
Date: May 19, 2021 Date: May 19, 2021