J
Students

 JEC-R-E1

Boulder Valley School District

Adopted:
 January 26, 2009

Revised: 
June 23, 2010

EARLY ACCESS

The Colorado Education of Exceptional Children Act (C.R.S. § 22.20‐104.5) as amended in July, 2008 provides early access to educational services for kindergarten and first grade students to meet the unique needs of the highly advanced gifted child. It does not permit early access to all gifted 4 or 5 year olds. Quality preschool programs will meet the needs of most gifted children.

Criteria

Identification will be based on best practices for identifying gifted learners with guidance from CDE and will include a body of evidence to determine a child’s need for Early Access. Criteria will identify highly advanced gifted children who are age 4 by the start of school for kindergarten or age 5 by the start of school for first grade. The child who may benefit from Early Access is academically gifted, socially and emotionally mature, in the top 2% of the gifted peer group, motivated to learn, and ready to begin school. Testing from outside sources will not be considered in the body of evidence.

Process

Decisions regarding acceptance for Early Access will be made collaboratively by the designated review committee including a Principal, Talented and Gifted staff and Early Childhood educators.

All applicants complete the Online Enrollment form. Those requesting enrollment in a school other than their neighborhood school also complete the Open Enrollment form. These forms are available online and at the BVSD Education Center.

All applicants complete an Early Access Application. These will be available at the BVSD Education Center and will include:

 * Applicant contact information;

 * Early Access Survey completed by parent/guardian;

 * Early Access Survey completed by early childhood educator or other knowledgeable adult;

 * Performance evidence including student work samples.

All applicants will complete a level one assessment. Based on the results of this assessment, some applicants will move to the portfolio review. Parent/guardians will be notified.

Portfolio review for selected applicants. Based on the results of this review, some applicants will move to the level two assessments. Parent/guardians will be notified.

Level two assessments for selected applicants and review of the full body of evidence by designated review committee.

Determination and notification of Early Access decisions. Parent/guardians and schools will be notified.

For More Information

Contact the Office of Advanced Academic Services.