J
Students

 JEC

Boulder Valley School District

Adopted:
  May 27, 1982

Revised
:  June 25, 1992, November 18, 1993, April 24, 2024

SCHOOL ADMISSIONS

All persons between the ages of 5 and the attaining of 21 years who have not graduated from high school and who reside within the boundaries of this School District may attend public schools without payment of tuition. Students will be enrolled at whatever time of the school year they become residents of the School District. The School District shall also admit preschool children ages 3 and 4 years of age who qualify for special programs provided by the School District.  

Persons who do not reside in the School District may be admitted in accordance with the Board Policy JECC, Open Enrollment.  

Residency

Colorado and federal law define residence for purposes of school enrollment. If a question arises, the Principal shall determine a student’s residency for purposes of enrollment, and may consult with the Superintendent’s designee if necessary.

Age Requirements 

Every child who has attained the age of six (6) years old on or before August 1 of each year and is under the age of 17 is required to attend public school with such exceptions as provided by law. It is the parents' responsibility to ensure attendance.

To be admitted to kindergarten in the Boulder Valley Schools, a child must be five (5) years old on or before October 1 or be admitted through early access. To be admitted  to first grade, the child must be six (6) years old on or before October 1 or be admitted through early access. Exceptions exist for children of military families in accordance with applicable law. 

Any appeals to the entrance age requirement must be submitted to the Assistant Superintendent.  Appeals must include: written verification that the child has completed at least three quarters of the school year at an accredited public school or has completed a full school year at an accredited parochial or private school; complete records of attendance, grade placement, academic achievement, and any other pertinent documents which have been provided by the school last attended; evidence of the school’s accreditation. 

Documentation for Admission

In providing the information necessary for admission, students and their parents, guardians, or legal custodians shall not be required to reveal their immigration status.

Proof of Age:
 Parents, guardians, or legal custodians should provide a birth certificate or other proof of age for all children not previously enrolled in the Boulder Valley Schools.  

When these documents for admission are not available, school administrators will work to determine the student’s age for school purposes with existing information and with the parents/guardians/students asserting they are 18 years of age or older..  

School Records:
 Students transferring from other schools should present records of attendance, grade placement, and academic achievement, as well as any other pertinent documents from the last school of attendance.

When these school records are not available, parents, custodians, legal guardians, or students over 18 years of age and school administrators will work together with existing information to determine the student's grade placement and assignment of credit when appropriate. 

The Principal is responsible for reviewing student enrollment records to determine eligibility for enrollment.  

Immunizations:
 Under law, no child may attend any school unless the parent or guardian presents certification regarding immunizations or exemptions in accordance with Policy JHCB, Immunization of Students. 

Physical Examinations:
 Students entering Boulder Valley Schools for the first time, are asked to have a physical examination and to submit a report from the examining physician. The purpose of a physical examination is to assist the School in supporting the student’s wellbeing and development.

Denial of Admission:
 In addition to the requirements for admission set forth in this policy, the following may be grounds for denial of admission:  

Having been expelled from any school district during the preceding 12 months.  

Behavior in another school district during the preceding 12 months that is detrimental to the welfare or safety of other pupils or of school personnel. 

The principal, after consultation with the Superintendent's designee, may recommend that a student be denied admission on the grounds stated above.  

The procedures for such denial of admission shall be the same as those for expulsion. 

LEGAL REFERENCES  

C.R.S. 22-1-115 (school age)

C.R.S. 22-20-204 (program plan requirements regarding highly advanced gifted children)

C.R.S. 22-32-119 (kindergarten)

C.R.S. 22-54-103 (10) (sets October 1 date for funding)

C.R.S. 22-54-103 (10.5) (defines pupil enrollment count day)

C.R.S. 24-60-3402 (Interstate Compact on Educational Opportunity for Military Children)

1 CCR 301-8, 2220-R-12.00 (highly advanced gifted children)

C.R.S. § 22‐1‐102 (residence of child)
, 
102.5 (definition of homeless child)
, and 
115 (school census)

C.R.S. § 22‐32‐115 (tuition for resident school-age children)
,
116 (exclusion of non-residents)
, and 
118 (summer schools - continuation, evening, and community education programs)

C.R.S. § 22‐33‐103‐106 (School Attendance Law of 1963)

C.R.S. § 25‐4‐901‐908 (school entry immunization)