Boulder Valley School District
File: BDFF
Adopted: June 14, 2022
Long Range Advisory Committee
Committee Description
The Board of Education shall appoint a Long Range Advisory Committee (LRAC), which
shall develop recommendations to ensure sound long-term facility decisions consistent
with the needs of the School District and in support of the School District’s strategic
initiatives.
LRAC is intended to provide a high level of accountability, engagement, and
communication with the Boulder Valley community to ensure stakeholders are engaged
and their values and priorities are reflected in the Board’s decisions.
Committee Responsibilities
● Review enrollment trends and facility utilization to identify data and information
needed to accurately assess current and future facility demands.
● Review the School District’s expanding program offerings and analyze
cost-effective ways to provide space for these programs.
● Assess system-wide school and facility utilization and develop strategies to
ensure an equitable distribution of program opportunities for all BVSD students.
● Provide periodic updates and recommendations to the Superintendent and the
Board of Education.
Membership
LRAC is comprised of voluntary representative members of the Boulder Valley School
District community. In constituting the committee, the Board will strive to reflect the
diversity of the BVSD community with respect to social, economic, ethnic, geographic,
linguistic, and age demographics, as well as constituents with and without school-aged
children. Also, the Board will strive to create a committee with a broad background of
knowledge and experience including but not limited to general business, real estate,
information technology, development/construction, architecture/engineering, and
financial management/banking/accounting. Up to thirty (30) members will be selected
based upon the following suggested stakeholder groups:
● At least two (2) members representing each community in BVSD: Mountains,
Boulder, Louisville, Superior, Lafayette, Erie, and Broomfield
● At least one (1) elementary principal, one (1) middle level principal, one (1) high
school principal, and one (1) charter school principal
● One (1) Boulder Valley Education Association representative.
● At least one (1) member from each of the following committees/councils: Budget
Advisory Committee, Special Education Advisory Committee, District Accountability
Committee, District Parent Council, Latino Parent Advisory Council, Equity Council,
Youth Equity Council, and Parents of Color Council.
Appointment Process
The Superintendent or designee will create an online application process to be available
on the BVSD website. Designated staff will review applications and present candidates
to the Board of Education for approval.
Individuals selected will be appointed for one year terms and may reapply for any
subsequent terms.
Meetings
The LRAC is to meet not more than monthly or less than quarterly. A regular meeting
schedule will be developed, kept updated, and posted in the same place and manner as
School Board meetings.
All committee meetings shall be open to the public.
Recommendations
The LRAC may arrive at the committee’s recommendations by voting or any other fair and
appropriate process the committee may adopt. Voting may be done in person, via e-mail, or
digital poll.