A school consolidation once divided Boulder. Now the district is about to try again.
Published: 2026-03-22T21:00:00
Source: https://boulderreportinglab.org/2026/03/22/a-school-consolidation-once-divided-boulder-now-the-district-is-about-to-try-again/

This story is part of a series, 
BVSD: The Enrollment Reckoning
, examining how declining enrollment and shifting demographics are forcing the district to rethink the future of its schools.

When the Boulder Valley School District abruptly consolidated five schools in 2000, the move sparked protests, recall efforts and bitter divisions. More than two decades later, as the district confronts demographic changes that could force 
far larger consolidations
, that episode still looms.

Now, every move the district makes is under scrutiny. Leaders say they are trying to avoid the pitfalls that sowed so much distrust 25 years ago. 

In 1998, the school board raised the possibility of consolidating five South Boulder schools, citing uneven per-pupil spending. At the time, enrollment in South Boulder was shrinking, while schools in east county were expanding into portable classrooms. Meanwhile, charter schools were emerging, often sharing space with other schools but quickly outgrowing those arrangements in the early years of school choice.

Parents pushed back immediately. The board retreated, passing a resolution to pause consolidation discussions for three years. As a concession, the board also approved additional funding for Boulder-area school facility improvements. That pleased the community and helped the board win support for a $63 million bond.

But just before Christmas in 1999, a full year before discussions were supposed to resume, about 700 students were sent home with a note alerting parents that their school would be consolidated with another, according to 
reporting
 at the time. For many families, the board’s premature and abrupt change of heart felt like a betrayal. 

By then, it was too late

In the days and weeks that followed, a group of parents organized, forming the Community Action Committee for Boulder Valley Schools. They asked the board to rescind the initial proposal and work with the community to establish a fair, deliberate process moving forward, one that allowed for public input.

They expected a dialogue. Instead, they encountered decisions that had largely already been made.

Repeated calls to pause the plan, known as the South Boulder Proposal, went nowhere. Parents urged the district to develop a broader, long-term facilities plan, but by then, the board believed it had little room to maneuver.

Just a month after the proposal surfaced, on January 27, 2000, the board voted 6-1 to consolidate five elementary schools across South Boulder. 

In all, about 700 students were caught in the shuffle.

Majestic Heights would close, sending those students to Martin Park. The Boulder Community School of Integrated Studies (BCSIS), which was also housed at Majestic Heights, would move to Aurora 7. The Aurora 7 students and the High Peaks program would relocate to Martin Park. 

Today, only two of the affected schools, High Peaks and BCSIS, are still operating, both non-traditional magnet schools.

There were a range of opinions about the plan, but there was particular angst among families at Majestic Heights. Those students were being asked to cross Table Mesa, a busy four-lane road, to reach Martin Park. 

A related effort to relocate Summit Middle, a charter school, also proved rocky. After deciding to close Majestic Heights, the board moved to separate Summit from Southern Hills Middle. The two had shared a building for four years, and as Summit grew, the space became tight. While many welcomed moving the school, the execution proved problematic. 

Under a one-year contract, Summit was relocated to the former Majestic Heights building, even though it had been designed for elementary students
.
 The building lacked basic facilities like science labs and a suitable auditorium. 

Because charter schools were still relatively new — Summit was the district’s first — the school was not in a position to push back.

Despite the political turmoil, school leaders later reported that day-to-day operations with Southern Hills were manageable. The broader lesson, they wrote in an annual report, was that “sharing of a building does work if district and building leadership are dedicated to making it work.”

A deeper rupture

In the weeks leading up to the board’s approval of the South Boulder Proposal, a sense of urgency took hold.

Parents voiced fears and criticism at board meetings, but the action committee got nowhere. By pausing the discussion in 1998, the board had delayed taking action on a growing problem and now found itself trying to address what it described as an emergency funding gap. 

One board member, the lone vote against the plan, said he had raised concerns about the district’s funding problems earlier in the budget process but was dismissed. He later argued that upcoming elections made other board members reluctant to take politically risky steps. 

So by the time those notices came home from school to affected families, the board believed its hands were tied. 

A smaller but notable part of the consolidation plan also involved a proposal to convert Casey Middle into a K-8 bilingual program. The district believed that dual language students were too scattered and wanted to merge them into one, stronger program. 

The plan was ultimately dropped, but Casey did expand its program to become the district’s main bilingual middle school, absorbing dual-language students from Southern Hills.  

The merging of two distinct bilingual programs was messy. Many white families moved their kids out of the school, contributing to increased segregation. Casey became one of the district’s lowest-performing schools, and it is still 
working to recover
 from that period.

Bigger scale, more scrutiny

Compared with the demographic changes facing the district today, the 2000 consolidation was relatively small. 

This time, thousands, not hundreds, of students could be impacted as the district prepares for an enrollment drop of another 1,700 students by 2030. 

Lower birth rates are reshaping schools across the country, particularly in higher-cost areas like Boulder where young families are less likely to reside. Within BVSD, 14 schools are projected to shrink to two or fewer classes per grade by 2030, and eight could fall below 50% capacity. 

Among them are two of the district’s three dual-language schools. 

At the same time, choice schools like High Peaks are expected to grow as families seek more predictable options amid uncertainty about neighborhood schools.

District leaders say they are prioritizing early engagement this time. They have met with educators and will hold public meetings the week of April 13. Attendees will be led through an activity where they put themselves in the shoes of a student or teacher in an underresourced school, with the goal of building understanding before feedback is given.

Time will tell if the community feels genuinely heard during this phase of district engagement or whether the process is seen as a formality before predetermined plans are made public. 

Either way, many families could be left deeply frustrated.

As school board president Stan Garnett put it during the 2000 debacle, “There is no issue as difficult to talk about as the closure of an elementary school.” 

The district now faces a delicate balancing act. Parents need to feel like the board is using their feedback, and the district needs to justify its decisions to prove it’s leading the community in the right direction. If they don’t, the issue could be exacerbated by more families leaving for private schools or homeschooling, making enrollment declines even harder to manage.

That dynamic played out in 2000. Some parents didn’t abide by the district’s plan to move certain students to certain schools. 
Reporting
 at the time quoted one angry parent from Majestic Heights who put her kid in a school across town just to make a point.  

“It was a pure emotional reaction to being told what to do,” she said. “The school board expected 300 to 400 parents to obediently march over and enroll their kids in Martin Park, but they’ve only gotten about 120 parents to do that. That should tell them something. It says the parents are pissed.”