Rowan, left, talks with Boulder Valley school board President Nicole Rajpal about his lesson at Mesa Elementary in Boulder on Nov. 18. Boulder Valley school board members visited different sized elementary schools as the district grapples with declining enrollment. (Staff photo) 

By 
Amy Bounds
 | 
abounds@prairiemountainmedia.com
 | Boulder Daily Camera
PUBLISHED: 
February 11, 2026 at 8:49 AM MST
 | UPDATED: 
February 11, 2026 at 12:21 PM MST
Getting your 
Trinity Audio
 player ready...
The Boulder Valley school board got more data Tuesday on declining enrollment at its elementary schools, including which elementary schools are below capacity and have fewer than two classes per grade level.

The school board discussed the district’s third annual enrollment trends report at Tuesday’s meeting. The annual report was one of the recommendations by the 
Long Range Advisory Committee
, which was created in the 2022-23 school year to help the district respond to shrinking enrollment at many of its elementary schools.

Boulder Valley has used the enrollment trends report to identify schools for a community engagement process and as an “early warning system” for schools with declining enrollment. The community engagement process was triggered when enrollment fell below 50% capacity, the school had one-and-a-half classes or fewer per grade level, and the school was projected to continue at that level for at least five years.

Heatherwood, which is in Gunbarrel north of Boulder, was the first Boulder Valley school to reach a small enough size to go through the process. An advisory group recommended an environmental STEM focus to attract more students to Heatherwood. The school 
launched the new program
 in the fall.

Long Range Advisory Committee co-chairperson Jeff Anderson noted the limitations of following the model used at Heatherwood, which would require the district to add resources at multiple schools and likely wouldn’t make a significant difference in enrollment.

“While great things are happening at Heatherwood, we’re not seeing a huge enrollment increase there,” he said.

This year, Boulder’s Flatirons Elementary also meets the criteria for the community engagement process. Another seven elementary schools have fewer than two classes per grade and are below 60% capacity. Those schools are Coal Creek, Community Montessori, Eisenhower, Eldorado, Kohl, Mesa and Whittier.

While the school district is continuing to use the Long Range Planning Commission’s data and analysis, it’s moving away from looking at one low-enrollment school at a time.

Faced with “stark” enrollment projections, school board members in November asked district leaders to start coming up with 
regional solutions
 that could include consolidating schools, reconfiguring grade levels and relocating programs. The district emailed its first edition of an “enrollment impact” newsletter to families on Tuesday.

Leaders are collecting feedback on facility options through May and plan to present the information gathered to the school board in June. Next, they will develop facility options over the summer to present to the school board in August for feedback. A final plan that includes any needed attendance boundary changes, open enrollment preference changes and facility improvements is expected to be presented to the school board in September, followed by a final vote in October.

Enrollment dropped by 525 students this fall, the second-biggest loss since the pandemic.

Not including charter schools, the school district has the capacity to serve 14,585 K-5 students, but currently serves just 9,732 K-5 students. That means there are 4,811 open seats, with an elementary utilization rate of 67%. Projections show 5,110 open seats, for a 65% elementary utilization rate, in five years. 

Boulder’s 14 elementary schools, with a total capacity of about 7,100 students, have the lowest utilization rate, at 65%, and are projected to drop to 59% in five years. The district’s elementary “focus,” or magnet schools, also are mainly located in Boulder. Only three Boulder schools are expected to be above two classes per grade level by 2029. 

The next lowest are Louisville and Superior’s six K-5 schools, which have a utilization rate of 67% that’s expected to drop to 61% in five years. Broomfield’s four K-5 schools have a 74% utilization rate that’s expected to drop to 73% in five years. 

Several school board members talked about the complexity of evolving data and figuring out regional solutions that work for multiple schools, as well as the need for Boulder and other communities to prioritize family-friendly housing.

“There isn’t one solution that is going to be exactly right,” school board President Nicole Rajpal. “Just leaning into the listening, this is going to look different than our neighboring districts because our challenges are slightly different.”

Keep up to date with all Boulder Valley School District news

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X