By 
Amy Bounds
 | 
abounds@prairiemountainmedia.com
 | Boulder Daily Camera
PUBLISHED: 
August 24, 2026 at 1:32 PM MDT
 | UPDATED: 
August 25, 2026 at 10:59 AM MDT
Getting your 
Trinity Audio
 player ready...
Boulder Valley leaders on Tuesday will present a much anticipated plan on which schools and programs will be closed, consolidated, reconfigured or relocated to address the school district’s 
declining enrollment
.

The work session starts at 3 p.m. Tuesday at the Education Center, 6500 E. Arapahoe Road, Boulder. The meeting will be streamed live at 
bit.ly/3SzycqD
. Work sessions don’t include public comment.

The district is focusing on declining enrollment solutions for schools in three regions: Boulder; Louisville and Superior; and Broomfield.

District leaders promised to consider 
feedback gathered in the spring
 through community engagement sessions, teacher roundtables and an online survey as they developed the draft plan over the summer. Staff members analyzed enrollment trends, building capacity, facility conditions and long-term students needs as they weighed the potential consequences and possibilities, according to the district.

The school board will hear from the community and discuss the draft plan at its Sept. 8 and 22 meetings. The board is scheduled to vote at the Sept. 22 meeting. Any changes will go into effect in the fall of 2027.

At a previous meeting, several school board members said they want to make “significant maneuvers” now so more changes aren’t needed in the next five to 10 years, as well as to allow the district to save enough money to make the improvements the community wants to see at existing schools. Those improvements include fewer multi-grade classes and more dedicated educators, such as math and literacy interventionists and specials (art, music and P.E.) teachers, to support students.

In the next five years, the district projects a loss of 1,700 students, for a total decline of more than 5,000 students since 2017. Reasons for the drop, officials said, include lower birth rates, an aging population, the high cost of living, low housing inventory and more affordable housing opportunities in surrounding districts.

The result is under-enrolled schools, especially at the elementary level. Not including charter schools, the school district has the capacity to serve 14,543 K-5 students but currently serves just 9,732 K-5 students. That means there are 4,811 open seats, with an elementary utilization rate of 67%. Projections show 5,110 open seats, for a 65% elementary utilization rate, in five years. 

For individual schools, eight elementary schools — not including mountain schools and charter schools — were 
identified in February
 as having fewer than two classes per grade with enrollment below 60% capacity. Those schools are Coal Creek, Community Montessori, Eisenhower, Eldorado, Flatirons, Kohl, Mesa and Whittier.

A ninth elementary school, Heatherwood in Gunbarrel north of Boulder, also met that same small school criteria. Heatherwood was the first Boulder Valley school to reach a small enough size to go through a community engagement process. An advisory group recommended an environmental STEM focus to attract more students, and Heatherwood 
launched the new program
 last fall.

But the district’s 
Long Range Advisory Committee
 noted the limitations of following the model used at Heatherwood to address declining enrollment districtwide, saying it would require the district to add resources at multiple schools and likely wouldn’t make a significant difference in overall enrollment numbers.

At the seven community engagement sessions held in the spring, consolidating schools was the option that received the most support, with 64% agreeing or strongly agreeing with the idea. Reasons participants supported consolidation included that it’s a sustainable, long-term solution and provides the opportunity to build a new, unified school community.

In a consolidation, two schools would be combined into one. Students from the closed school would be able to stay together by attending the new, combined school in an existing building.

The option receiving the next highest support, with 56% agreeing or strongly agreeing, was splitting K-8 schools into separate elementary and middle schools. Boulder Valley has three PK-8 schools that could be affected: Aspen Creek in Broomfield, Eldorado in Superior, and Monarch in Louisville.

The remaining options were supported by less than half of the participants.

Closing schools and redistributing students was supported by 40% of respondents. In a closure, students from the closed school would be absorbed into two or more existing schools. Relocating focus programs was supported by 39%, splitting elementary schools into PK-2 and 3-5 grades was supported by 25%, and introducing or expanding focus programs was supported by 22%.

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X