Students Drew, left, and Campbell hold hands while talking about a project at Mesa Elementary in Boulder on Nov. 18 (Daily Camera file photo) 

By 
Amy Bounds
 | 
abounds@prairiemountainmedia.com
 | Boulder Daily Camera
PUBLISHED: 
June 10, 2026 at 8:21 AM MDT
 | UPDATED: 
June 10, 2026 at 11:44 AM MDT
Getting your 
Trinity Audio
 player ready...
A majority of Boulder Valley families who participated in spring community engagement sessions supported consolidating elementary schools to address the school district’s continued enrollment declines.

The Boulder Valley school board heard a report Tuesday on feedback on 
declining enrollment solutions
 gathered in the spring through 
community engagement sessions
, teacher roundtables and an online survey. District leaders plan to use the feedback as they develop a draft plan on 
solutions
 that could include consolidating or closing schools, reconfiguring grade levels and relocating programs.

The draft plan is expected to be presented to the school board in August, with a vote on the final plan set for October.

At Tuesday’s meeting, several school board members said they want to make “significant maneuvers” now so more changes aren’t needed in the next five to 10 years and so the district can save enough money to make the improvements the community wants to see at existing schools.

“Now is the time to be forward thinking and look at meaningful changes, because small measures aren’t enough anymore,” school board member Jorge Chávez said.

In the next five years, the district projects a loss of 1,700 students, for a total decline of more than 5,000 students since 2017. Reasons for the drop, officials said, include lower birth rates, an aging population, the high cost of living, low housing inventory and more affordable housing opportunities in surrounding districts. 

The result is under-enrolled schools, especially at the elementary level. Not including charter schools, the school district has the capacity to serve 14,585 K-5 students but currently serves just 9,732 K-5 students. That means there are 4,811 open seats, with an elementary utilization rate of 67%. Projections show 5,110 open seats, for a 65% elementary utilization rate, in five years. 

The district is focusing on declining enrollment solutions for Boulder, Louisville and Superior, and Broomfield schools and basing decisions on those five-year enrollment projections, not current enrollment numbers, Superintendent Rob Anderson said.

“In five years, we would have multi age classes across the district and fractured supports for students,” he said. “It wouldn’t provide the experience that our families expect and that our kids need.”

Assistant Superintendent of Operations Rob Price speaks during a community engagement session to discuss declining enrollment issues at the Boulder Valley School District Education Center on April 15. (Matthew Jonas/Staff Photographer)

About 640 parents and community members attended the seven, 2½ hour, focus-group-style community engagement sessions. Of those, 568 returned feedback forms, while another 140 responded to a follow-up survey. 

“We do not have evidence that our community is fighting for the status quo,” Anderson said. “We don’t have that evidence. We did not hear do nothing, everything is fine.”

Consolidating schools was the option that received the most support, with 64% agreeing or strongly agreeing with the idea. Another 21% were neutral, while 15% disagreed or strongly disagreed. Reasons participants supported consolidation included that it’s a sustainable, long-term solution and provides the opportunity to build a new, unified school community. 

In a consolidation, two schools would be combined into one. Students from the closed school would be able to stay together by attending the new, combined school in an existing building.

The option receiving the next highest support, with 56% agreeing or strongly agreeing, was splitting K-8 schools into separate elementary and middle schools. Boulder Valley has three PK-8 schools that could be affected: Aspen Creek in Broomfield, Eldorado in Superior, and Monarch in Louisville. District officials noted the Louisville and Superior residents who participated were nearly evenly divided between splitting the schools and preserving the PK-8 model.

The remaining options were supported by less than half of the participants. Closing schools and redistributing students was supported by 40% of respondents. In a closure, students from the closed school would be absorbed into two or more existing schools.

Relocating focus programs was supported by 39%, splitting elementary schools into PK-2 and 3-5 grades was supported by 25%, and introducing or expanding focus programs was supported by 22%. 

Respondents with children at three Broomfield schools, Birch Elementary, Kohl Elementary and Aspen Creek PK-8, advocated to redraw attendance boundary lines.

Overall, the top small-school challenges respondents wanted to see the district prioritize were limited small group support, multi-grade classrooms, limited access to specials (art, music and P.E.), part-time counselors and part-time instructional support staff members.

At the last session, added in May and held in Spanish to reach more Spanish-speaking families, the 60 participants prioritized cultural preservation and bilingual program access. They viewed increased travel to schools as a barrier to access, not just a logistical hurdle, and feared school closures would be disruptive for students and diminish students’ positive attitudes about school.

Of the 328 people who attended elementary staff roundtables, 52% supported consolidating schools, 28% supported closing schools and 19% supported grade reconfigurations. About 90% wanted solutions to address class sizes and part-time staff challenges. Staff members also valued time to collaborate and plan. 

For the Resilient Schools Survey sent to families and staff members, 5,244 people responded. Of those, 47% considered small class sizes a “must have,” 42% wanted full-time specials teachers and 30% wanted full-time math and literacy specialists. 

When ranking priorities, keeping class sizes small was the highest priority, outranking every other option by nearly 2-to-1. The second tier of priorities were equitable funding and protecting well-rounded experiences. Operational needs like teacher planning time and library staff ranked lowest. The community views these as basic requirements the district should include, according to the district, rather than items that should compete for extra resources.

School board President Nicole Rajpal said she hears that the community priority is consolidation, but she cautioned that may not be possible for all school situations. She urged staff to consolidate schools when facilities allow while also looking at attendance boundary adjustments and other changes as needed. To be able to afford smaller class sizes and more student support, she said, the district likely will need to use several options.

“The bigger maneuvers we have, the more dollars we have to free up to do all of the stuff that we’ve really heard loud and clear that our community, our students, our staff really do want,” she said. 

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X